docs:#1552 doc controller snapshots (#1658)
redpanda-data/documentation: modules/manage/pages/schema-reg/schema-reg-contexts.adoc

= Schema Registry Contexts
:description: Use Schema Registry contexts to create isolated namespaces for schemas, subjects, and configuration—enabling multi-tenant and multi-team deployments without separate Schema Registry instances.
:page-tags: [Schema Registry, contexts, multi-tenant, Serverless, Confluent compatibility]
// Learning objectives:
// - Understand what Schema Registry contexts are and when to use them.
// - Understand the qualified subject syntax (:<context>:<subject>).
// - Enable the feature using the cluster configuration property.
// - Configure contexts, including per-context mode and compatibility settings.
// - Apply ACLs to control access at the context level.
// - Identify updated metrics and the new cluster configuration property.
// - Resolve common issues related to upgrade and subject naming.

// Single-sourcing tags: use ifdef/ifndef blocks for content that differs
// between self-managed and Redpanda Cloud. Cloud-only content is wrapped
// in ifdef::env-cloud[] ... endif::[] blocks. Self-managed-only content
// is wrapped in ifndef::env-cloud[] ... endif::[] blocks.

> Schema Registry contexts are namespaces that isolate schemas, subjects, and configuration from one another within a single Schema Registry instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Schema Registry contexts provide namespaces that isolate schemas, subjects, and configuration from one another within a single Schema Registry instance, providing unique schema ID spaces per context.
```

Each context maintains its own schema ID counter, mode, and compatibility settings.

> Use contexts when you need to separate schema workloads by tenant, team, or environment—without deploying multiple Schema Registry instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use contexts when you need to separate schema workloads by tenant, team, or environment, and avoid having to deploy multiple Schema Registry instances.
```

== When to use contexts

> Contexts are most useful in the following scenarios:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Contexts are most useful for:
```

* *Multi-tenant deployments* (including Serverless): Each tenant can have a dedicated context with its own schema ID space and configuration so that one tenant's schema activity cannot interfere with another's.
* *Multi-team deployments on a shared cluster*: Teams such as engineering, finance, and operations can register schemas independently under their own contexts without risking naming collisions or configuration drift.

> * *Migrations from Confluent Schema Registry*: Confluent SR uses contexts to namespace schemas. If your existing workflows or tooling rely on contexts, Redpanda's compatible implementation lets you migrate without restructuring your schema layout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Migrations from Confluent Schema Registry*: Confluent Schema Registry uses contexts to namespace schemas. If your existing workflows or tooling rely on contexts, Redpanda's compatible implementation lets you migrate without restructuring your schema layout.
```

* *Disaster recovery and schema syncing*: Dedicated namespaces reduce collision risk when syncing schemas across clusters.

== Prerequisites

Before using Schema Registry contexts, ensure that:

> * You are running Redpanda *26.1 or later*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You are running Redpanda *v26.1 or later*.
```

* The `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` cluster configuration property is set to `true`.
+
ifndef::env-cloud[]
[NOTE]
====

> In 26.1, `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` defaults to `false`. You must explicitly enable it for self-managed clusters or to test in a non-Serverless environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting in v26.1, `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` defaults to `false`. You must explicitly enable it for self-managed clusters or to test in a non-Serverless environment.
```

> In 26.1, `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` defaults to `false`. You must explicitly enable it for self-managed clusters or to test in a non-Serverless environment. In 26.2, the property defaults to `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In 26.1, `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` defaults to `false`. You must explicitly enable it for self-managed clusters or to test in a non-Serverless environment.
```

====
endif::env-cloud[]
+
ifdef::env-cloud[]
[NOTE]
====

> On Serverless, contexts are enabled by default. On BYOC and Dedicated clusters, `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` defaults to `false` in 26.1 and `true` in 26.2. Enable it to start using contexts before 26.2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Serverless, contexts are enabled by default. On BYOC and Dedicated clusters, `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` defaults to `false`.
```

> ====

Reviewer: No, this is not the correct solution

endif::env-cloud[]

> * If you use Schema Registry ACLs, the principal interacting with a context has the appropriate permissions. See <<acl-authorization>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If you use Schema Registry ACLs, ensure that the principal interacting with a context has the appropriate permissions. See <<acl-authorization>>.
```

== Limitations

> * *Console, rpk, and Kubernetes Operator*: Support for contexts in the Redpanda Console UI, `rpk` CLI, and Kubernetes Operator is not available in 26.1. Use the Schema Registry HTTP API directly. Console, rpk, and Operator support will be delivered in a subsequent release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Console, rpk, and Kubernetes Operator*: Do not support contexts in Redpanda v26.1. Use the Schema Registry HTTP API directly. 
```

* *Cross-context isolation*: Contexts provide organizational isolation (separate ID spaces, subject namespaces, and configuration), not full data isolation. Schemas in one context can reference schemas in another context.
* *Blocking cross-context references*: There is no mechanism to prevent cross-context schema references.

> * *DR/RPCN syncing into specific contexts*: Syncing schemas from remote clusters directly into a named context is not yet supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *DR/RPCN syncing into specific contexts*: Syncing schemas from remote clusters directly into a named context is not supported.
```

* *WASM integration*: Context-aware schema IDs are not yet surfaced in WASM data transforms.
* *Breaking change on upgrade*: After enabling `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects`, any existing subject whose name matches the qualified subject pattern `:<context>:<subject>` (for example, `:.staging:user-value`) is reinterpreted as subject `user-value` in context `.staging` rather than as a literal subject name in the default context. See <<upgrade-considerations>>.

ifndef::env-cloud[]
[NOTE]
====
No enterprise license is required to use contexts. Contexts are fully functional in the open-source Redpanda build.

> ====

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[NOTE]
====
Schema Registry contexts does not require an enterprise license.
====
```

endif::env-cloud[]

== How Schema Registry contexts work

> Redpanda Schema Registry previously maintained a flat namespace: all schemas shared a single global schema ID counter and a single set of mode and compatibility settings (with optional per-subject overrides). Contexts extend this model by introducing named namespaces. Each context has its own schema ID counter that increments independently of other contexts, plus its own mode and compatibility settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prior to v26.1, Redpanda Schema Registry maintained a flat namespace: all schemas shared a single global schema ID counter and a single set of mode and compatibility settings (with optional per-subject overrides). Schema Registry contexts extend this model by introducing named namespaces. Each context has its own schema ID counter that increments independently of other contexts, in addition to its own mode and compatibility settings.
```

[source,bash]
----
rpk cluster config set schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects true
----

To verify the current setting:

[source,bash]
----
rpk cluster config get schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects
----
endif::env-cloud[]

ifdef::env-cloud[]
[NOTE]
====
On Serverless clusters, contexts are managed by Redpanda and enabled automatically per tenant. On BYOC and Dedicated clusters, contact Redpanda support or use the cluster configuration API to enable `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects`.
====
endif::env-cloud[]

== Configure Schema Registry contexts

=== Qualified subject syntax

Wherever the Schema Registry API accepts a subject—in path parameters, query parameters, or schema reference fields—you can supply a qualified subject instead of a bare subject name:

[cols="1,2", options="header"]
|===
| Syntax | Meaning

| `:<context>:<subject>` | Subject `<subject>` in context `<context>`.
| `:.production:user-events-value` | Subject `user-events-value` in context `.production`.
| `:.production:` | The context `.production` itself (empty subject name), used for context-level mode/config operations.

> | `user-events-value` | Subject `user-events-value` in the default context (unchanged behavior).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `user-events-value` | Subject `user-events-value` in the default context.
```

|===

=== Register a schema in a context

To register a schema in a named context, use the qualified subject form in the `POST /subjects/{subject}/versions` request:

[source,bash]
----
curl -s -X POST \
  http://localhost:8081/subjects/:.production:user-events-value/versions \
  -H "Content-Type: application/vnd.schemaregistry.v1+json" \
  -d '{"schema": "{\"type\":\"record\",\"name\":\"UserEvent\",\"fields\":[{\"name\":\"id\",\"type\":\"string\"},{\"name\":\"action\",\"type\":\"string\"}]}"}'
----

The schema ID returned is unique within the `.production` context and independent of schema IDs in other contexts.

=== List contexts

> To list all contexts that have been explicitly created (plus the default context), use the `GET /contexts` endpoint:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To list all contexts that have been explicitly created (in addition to the default context), use the `GET /contexts` endpoint:
```

[source,bash]
----
curl -s http://localhost:8081/contexts
----

Example response:

[source,json]
----
[".","production","staging"]
----

NOTE: The default context is always included in the response, represented as `"."`.

=== List subjects in a context

To list all subjects within a specific context, use the `/contexts/{context}/subjects` endpoint or the `subjectPrefix` query parameter on `GET /subjects`:

.List subjects within a context using the context path prefix
[source,bash]
----
curl -s http://localhost:8081/contexts/.production/subjects
----

.List subjects using subjectPrefix (explicit context)
[source,bash]
----
curl -s "http://localhost:8081/subjects?subjectPrefix=:.production:"
----

.List subjects across all contexts (wildcard)
[source,bash]
----
curl -s "http://localhost:8081/subjects?subjectPrefix=:*:"
----

.List subjects in the default context only (default behavior without subjectPrefix)
[source,bash]
----
curl -s http://localhost:8081/subjects
----

=== Set context-level mode

> Mode can be set at the context level by specifying a qualified subject with an empty subject name (`:<context>:`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can configure mode at the context level by specifying a qualified subject with an empty subject name (`:<context>:`):
```

[source,bash]
----
# Set the .staging context to IMPORT mode
curl -s -X PUT \
  http://localhost:8081/mode/:.staging: \
  -H "Content-Type: application/vnd.schemaregistry.v1+json" \
  -d '{"mode": "IMPORT"}'
----

[source,bash]
----
# Get the mode for the .staging context
curl -s http://localhost:8081/mode/:.staging:
----

=== Set context-level compatibility

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

 To configure context-level compatibility:
 
```

*Cause*: The context still has subjects that have not been fully deleted (hard-delete).

*Resolution*: Delete all subjects within the context before deleting the context itself. Use a soft delete followed by a hard delete, which is permanent:

[source,bash]
----
# Soft-delete the subject
curl -s -X DELETE \
  "http://localhost:8081/subjects/:<context>:<subject>"

# Hard-delete the subject (permanent)
curl -s -X DELETE \
  "http://localhost:8081/subjects/:<context>:<subject>?permanent=true"
----

Repeat for each subject in the context, then retry the `DELETE /contexts/{context}` request.

== Related topics

* xref:manage:schema-reg/schema-reg-overview.adoc[Redpanda Schema Registry]
* xref:manage:schema-reg/schema-reg-api.adoc[Use the Schema Registry API]
* xref:manage:schema-reg/schema-reg-authorization.adoc[Schema Registry Authorization]
* xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc[Public Metrics Reference]
ifndef::env-cloud[]
* xref:reference:cluster-properties.adoc[Cluster Configuration Properties]
endif::env-cloud[]
ifdef::env-cloud[]
* xref:reference:properties/cluster-properties.adoc[Cluster Configuration Properties]

> endif::env-cloud[]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Schema Registry Contexts
:description: Use Schema Registry contexts to create isolated namespaces for schemas, subjects, and configuration—enabling multi-tenant and multi-team deployments without separate Schema Registry instances.
:page-tags: [Schema Registry, contexts, multi-tenant, Confluent compatibility]
// Learning objectives:
// - Understand what Schema Registry contexts are and when to use them.
// - Understand the qualified subject syntax (:<context>:<subject>).
// - Enable the feature using the cluster configuration property (requires broker restart).
// - Configure contexts, including per-context mode and compatibility settings.
// - Apply ACLs to control access at the context level.
// - Identify updated metrics and the new cluster configuration property.
// - Resolve common issues related to upgrade, schema ID lookups, and subject naming.

// Single-sourcing tags: Cloud-only content is wrapped in ifdef::env-cloud[] ... endif::[]
// Self-managed-only content is wrapped in ifndef::env-cloud[] ... endif::[]

Schema Registry contexts are namespaces that isolate schemas, subjects, and configuration from one another within a single Schema Registry instance.
Each context maintains its own schema ID counter, mode settings, and compatibility settings.
Unqualified subjects continue to work unchanged in the implicit default context.

This feature is compatible with the Confluent Schema Registry Contexts API and requires no enterprise license.

== When to use contexts

Contexts are most useful in the following scenarios:

* *Multi-team deployments on a shared cluster*: Teams can register schemas independently under their own contexts without risking naming collisions or configuration drift.
* *Schema migration from Confluent Schema Registry*: Confluent SR uses contexts to namespace schemas. If your existing workflows or tooling rely on contexts, Redpanda's compatible implementation lets you migrate without restructuring your schema layout.
* *Multi-cluster schema syncing and disaster recovery*: Dedicated namespaces reduce schema ID collision risk when syncing schemas across clusters.

ifdef::env-cloud[]
NOTE: On Serverless clusters, Redpanda uses contexts internally for per-tenant isolation. Contexts are not exposed to end users on Serverless. On BYOC and Dedicated clusters, contexts are available and user-configurable.
endif::env-cloud[]

== Prerequisites

Before using Schema Registry contexts, ensure that:

* You are running Redpanda *26.1 or later*.
* The `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` cluster configuration property is set to `true`.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
`schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` is *not a dynamic property*. After changing it, you must restart your brokers for the change to take effect. If qualified subjects are still being treated as literal names after enabling the flag, a broker restart is the most likely missing step.
====
+
ifndef::env-cloud[]
[NOTE]
====
In 26.1, `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` defaults to `false`. You must explicitly enable it. In 26.2, the default changes to `true`. In 26.3, the property is removed and contexts are always enabled.
====
endif::env-cloud[]

* If you use Schema Registry ACLs, ensure the principal interacting with a context has the appropriate permissions. See <<acl-authorization>>.

== Limitations

* *Console and rpk*: Native support for context management operations (listing, creating, and deleting contexts) in the Redpanda Console UI and `rpk` CLI is in progress and not available in 26.1. Use the Schema Registry HTTP API directly. See <<client-integration-status>>.
* *Non-Java SerDe clients*: Non-Java serializer/deserializer clients do not yet natively support qualified subjects in 26.1. A fast-follow patch release in 26.1.x is planned. As a workaround, point these clients at the `/contexts/{context}/...` base URL path prefix. See <<client-integration-status>>.
* *Server-side schema ID validation*: Schema ID validation using Kafka record headers does not support contexts and is out of scope for the current release.
* *Iceberg topics*: Context-aware schema IDs are not yet surfaced in Iceberg topic integration.
* *`referencedby` endpoint*: `GET /subjects/{subject}/versions/{version}/referencedby` returns a list of bare schema IDs with no context information. When references span contexts, it is not possible to determine which context each returned ID belongs to.
* *Cross-context isolation*: Contexts provide organizational and ID-space isolation, but do not prevent cross-context schema references. There is no mechanism to block schemas in one context from referencing schemas in another context.
* *Default context cannot be deleted*: The default context (`.`) cannot be deleted.
* *Breaking change on upgrade*: After enabling `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects`, any existing subject whose name matches the qualified subject pattern (for example, `:.staging:user-value`) is reinterpreted as subject `user-value` in context `.staging` rather than as a literal subject name in the default context. See <<upgrade-considerations>>.

ifndef::env-cloud[]
NOTE: No enterprise license is required to use contexts.
endif::env-cloud[]

== How Schema Registry contexts work

=== Schema ID isolation

Before contexts, the Schema Registry maintained a single global ID counter. All schemas shared one ID space, and a given schema ID pointed to exactly one schema across the entire registry.

After enabling contexts, *each context has its own independent ID counter*. This means schema ID `1` in `.staging` and schema ID `1` in `.production` are different schemas. As a result, `GET /schemas/ids/{id}` searches the *default context only* by default. To retrieve a schema by ID from a non-default context, you must pass the `subject` query parameter to scope the lookup:

[source,bash]
----
GET /schemas/ids/1?subject=:.staging:my-topic
----

See also <<schema-id-lookup-fails>>.

=== Configuration resolution order

Before contexts, mode and compatibility settings resolved as:

----
Subject → Global → Built-in defaults
----

After enabling contexts, a context layer sits between subject and global:

----
Subject → Context → Global (.:.__GLOBAL:) → Built-in defaults
----

For example, setting the `.staging` context to `IMPORT` mode means all subjects in `.staging` inherit `IMPORT` unless they have a subject-level override, even if the global mode is `READWRITE`.

Use `defaultToGlobal=true` on `GET /config` and `GET /mode` requests to see the effective value after full fallback resolution.

=== Qualified subject syntax

Wherever the Schema Registry API accepts a subject, you can supply a qualified subject instead of a bare subject name:

[cols="2,1,2", options="header"]
|===
| Input | Context | Subject

| `user-events-value`
| `.` (default)
| `user-events-value`

| `:.staging:user-events-value`
| `.staging`
| `user-events-value`

| `:.:user-events-value`
| `.` (default)
| `user-events-value`

| `:.staging:`
| `.staging`
| (empty — used for context-level config/mode operations)
|===

=== `GET /subjects` behavior change

After enabling the flag, `GET /subjects` (with no `subjectPrefix`) returns subjects across *all* contexts. Non-default context subjects appear with their qualified names — for example, `:.staging:my-topic`. This is a behavioral change from the previous flat list of bare subject names.

=== Cross-context schema references

Contexts do not enforce isolation of schema references. Schemas can reference schemas in any other context. Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve within the same context as the root schema, not the default context. Qualified references can reach any context explicitly (for example, `:.shared:CommonType`).

== Enable Schema Registry contexts

ifndef::env-cloud[]
To enable contexts on a self-managed cluster, set the `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` cluster configuration property to `true`:

[source,bash]
----
rpk cluster config set schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects true
----

[IMPORTANT]
====
This property requires a broker restart. The change does not take effect until all brokers have restarted.
====

To verify the current setting:

[source,bash]
----
rpk cluster config get schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects
----
endif::env-cloud[]

ifdef::env-cloud[]
NOTE: On BYOC and Dedicated clusters, contact Redpanda support or use the cluster configuration API to enable `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects`. This property requires a broker restart.
endif::env-cloud[]

== Configure Schema Registry contexts

=== Register a schema in a context

To register a schema in a named context, use the qualified subject form in the `POST /subjects/{subject}/versions` request:

[source,bash]
----
curl -s -X POST \
  http://localhost:8081/subjects/:.staging:my-topic/versions \
  -H "Content-Type: application/vnd.schemaregistry.v1+json" \
  -d '{"schema": "{\"type\":\"string\"}"}'
----

The schema ID returned is unique within the `.staging` context and independent of schema IDs in other contexts.

=== List contexts

To list all materialized contexts (those that have had at least one schema registered), use `GET /contexts`:

[source,bash]
----
curl -s http://localhost:8081/contexts
----

Example response:

[source,json]
----
[".","staging","production"]
----

NOTE: A context is only listed after at least one schema has been registered in it. Pre-configuring mode or compatibility alone does not cause a context to appear in this list. The default context (`.`) is always included.

=== List subjects using subject prefix filtering

The `subjectPrefix` query parameter on `GET /subjects` lets you scope subject listings precisely. The following table shows supported patterns:

[cols="2,3", options="header"]
|===
| Prefix | Matches

| `my-`
| Subjects starting with `my-` in the default context only

| `:.staging:`
| All subjects in the `.staging` context

| `:.staging:my-`
| Subjects starting with `my-` in the `.staging` context

| `:*:`
| All subjects in all contexts

| `:*:my-`
| Subjects starting with `my-` across all contexts
|===

[source,bash]
----
# All subjects in the .staging context
curl -s "http://localhost:8081/subjects?subjectPrefix=:.staging:"

# All subjects across all contexts
curl -s "http://localhost:8081/subjects?subjectPrefix=:*:"
----

You can also list subjects within a context using the `/contexts/{context}/subjects` path:

[source,bash]
----
curl -s http://localhost:8081/contexts/.staging/subjects
----

=== Set context-level mode

Mode can be set at the context level by specifying a qualified subject with an empty subject name (`:<context>:`):

[source,bash]
----
# Set the .staging context to IMPORT mode
curl -s -X PUT \
  http://localhost:8081/mode/:.staging: \
  -H "Content-Type: application/vnd.schemaregistry.v1+json" \
  -d '{"mode": "IMPORT"}'

# Get the mode for the .staging context
# Use defaultToGlobal=true to see the effective value after fallback resolution
curl -s "http://localhost:8081/mode/:.staging:?defaultToGlobal=true"
----

=== Set context-level compatibility

[source,bash]
----
# Set compatibility for the .staging context
curl -s -X PUT \
  http://localhost:8081/config/:.staging: \
  -H "Content-Type: application/vnd.schemaregistry.v1+json" \
  -d '{"compatibility": "BACKWARD"}'

# Get compatibility for a specific subject within a context
# Use defaultToGlobal=true to see the effective value after fallback
curl -s "http://localhost:8081/config/:.staging:my-topic?defaultToGlobal=true"
----

=== Set the global context fallback

The `.:.__GLOBAL:` context provides the lowest-priority fallback for all contexts and subjects that do not have their own explicit setting:

[source,bash]
----
# Get the current global mode
curl -s http://localhost:8081/mode/:.__GLOBAL:

# Set global default compatibility
curl -s -X PUT \
  http://localhost:8081/config/:.__GLOBAL: \
  -H "Content-Type: application/vnd.schemaregistry.v1+json" \
  -d '{"compatibility": "FULL"}'
----

NOTE: `.__GLOBAL` is a reserved context name and cannot be used as a regular context name.

=== Retrieve schema references with qualified names

Use `referenceFormat=qualified` on `GET /subjects/{subject}/versions/{version}` to return references with context-qualified subject names instead of bare names:

[source,bash]
----
curl -s "http://localhost:8081/subjects/:.staging:my-topic/versions/1?referenceFormat=qualified"
----

This is useful when schemas span multiple contexts and you need to disambiguate reference targets.

=== Use a context as the client base URL

You can point a Schema Registry client at a specific context by setting the client's Schema Registry URL to `${host}/contexts/{context}`. Redpanda rewrites requests under this path prefix to operate within the specified context. This is the recommended workaround for non-Java SerDe clients that do not yet support qualified subject syntax natively:

----
# All requests to this base URL operate within the .staging context
http://localhost:8081/contexts/.staging
----

=== Pre-configure a context before registering schemas

You can set mode or compatibility on a context before any schemas are registered in it:

[source,bash]
----
curl -s -X PUT \
  http://localhost:8081/mode/:.new-team: \
  -H "Content-Type: application/vnd.schemaregistry.v1+json" \
  -d '{"mode": "READONLY"}'
----

Schema registrations in `:.new-team:` will be rejected until the mode is changed to `READWRITE`.

=== Cross-context schema references

Schemas can reference schemas in other contexts using qualified subject names in the `references` field:

[source,json]
----
{
  "schema": "...",
  "references": [
    {
      "name": "CommonType",
      "subject": ":.shared:CommonType",
      "version": 1
    }
  ]
}
----

Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve to the same context as the root schema, not the default context.

=== Delete a context

A context can only be deleted when it contains no subjects. Soft-deleted subjects still count — you must hard-delete all subjects before the context can be removed. Attempting to delete a non-empty context returns a `context_not_empty` error.

[NOTE]
====
The default context (`.`) cannot be deleted.
====

[source,bash]
----
# Hard-delete all subjects in the context first
curl -s -X DELETE "http://localhost:8081/subjects/:.staging:my-topic?permanent=true"

# Then delete the empty context
curl -s -X DELETE http://localhost:8081/contexts/.staging
----

== Cluster configuration property

`schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects`::
+
[cols="1,3"]
|===
| Type | Boolean
| Default (26.1) | `false`
| Default (26.2) | `true`
| Removed in | 26.3 (always enabled)
| Restart required | Yes
|===
+
When `false`, subjects are treated as literal strings (existing behavior). When `true`, subjects matching the `:<context>:<subject>` pattern are parsed as context-qualified subjects.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
This is not a dynamic property. Broker restart is required after changing this value.
====
+
ifndef::env-cloud[]
[source,bash]
----
rpk cluster config set schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects true
----
endif::env-cloud[]

== rpk commands

[NOTE]
====
Native `rpk` commands for context management operations (listing, creating, and deleting contexts) are not yet available. Use the Schema Registry HTTP API directly for context-level operations. See <<client-integration-status>>.
====

Existing `rpk registry` commands that accept a subject name support qualified subject syntax once `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` is enabled. Pass a qualified subject wherever a `--subject` flag is accepted:

[source,bash]
----
# Register a schema in a named context
rpk registry schema create \
  --subject ":.staging:my-topic" \
  --schema my-schema.avsc \
  --type avro

# List schemas for a subject in a named context
rpk registry schema list \
  --subject ":.staging:my-topic"

# Get a specific schema version from a context
rpk registry schema get \
  --subject ":.staging:my-topic" \
  --version 1

# Check compatibility for a subject in a context
rpk registry schema check-compatibility \
  --subject ":.staging:my-topic" \
  --schema my-schema-v2.avsc

# Get the compatibility level for a context
rpk registry compatibility-level get \
  --subject ":.staging:"

# Set the compatibility level for a context
rpk registry compatibility-level set \
  --subject ":.staging:" \
  --level BACKWARD

# Get the mode for a context
rpk registry mode get \
  --subject ":.staging:"

# Set the mode for a context
rpk registry mode set \
  --subject ":.staging:" \
  --mode READONLY

# Delete a subject within a context (soft delete)
rpk registry subject delete \
  --subject ":.staging:my-topic"

# List all subjects (returns qualified names for non-default contexts)
rpk registry subject list

# Grant read access to all subjects in a context (prefix ACL)
rpk security acl create \
  --registry-subject ":.staging:" \
  --resource-pattern-type prefixed \
  --operation read \
  --allow-principal User:alice
----

For full reference documentation on these commands, see:

* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-schema-create.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-schema-list.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-schema-get.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-schema-check-compatibility.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-compatibility-level-get.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-compatibility-level-set.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-mode-get.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-mode-set.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-subject-delete.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-subject-list.adoc[]

== Client integration status

[#client-integration-status]

[cols="2,1,3", options="header"]
|===
| Client | Status | Notes

| Schema Registry API (all operations)
| Full support
| Use qualified subjects directly in any endpoint.

| Java SerDe (Confluent)
| Supported
| Requires a custom `ContextNameStrategy`. See the Confluent SerDe documentation for details.

| Non-Java SerDe
| Not yet supported (26.1)
| Planned in a 26.1.x patch release. Workaround: set the client's Schema Registry base URL to `http://<host>:8081/contexts/{context}`.

| rpk
| In progress
| Context management commands not yet available. Qualified subjects work in existing `rpk registry` commands.

| Redpanda Console
| In progress
| Not available in 26.1.

| Server-side schema ID validation
| Not supported
| Out of scope for this release.
|===

== ACL authorization

[#acl-authorization]

Contexts use the existing `sr_subject` and `sr_registry` ACL resource types. No new resource types are needed.

[cols="2,2,2", options="header"]
|===
| Operation | ACL resource | Permission required

| Context-level config/mode (`PUT /config/:<context>:`, `PUT /mode/:<context>:`)
| `sr_registry`
| `alter_configs`

| Read context-level config/mode
| `sr_registry`
| `describe_configs`

| List subjects / list contexts
| `sr_subject` (results filtered to accessible subjects)
| `describe`

| Delete a context (`DELETE /contexts/{context}`)
| `sr_registry`
| `delete`

| Schema CRUD on a subject
| `sr_subject` on the specific subject
| `read` / `write` / `delete`

| Subject-level config/mode
| `sr_subject` on the specific subject
| `alter_configs` / `describe_configs`
|===

=== Grant access to all subjects in a context

Use a prefix ACL on `sr_subject` with `--resource-pattern-type prefixed` to grant access to all current and future subjects within a context:

[source,bash]
----
rpk security acl create \
  --registry-subject ":.staging:" \
  --resource-pattern-type prefixed \
  --operation read \
  --allow-principal User:alice \
  --brokers <brokers>
----

=== Audit log format

When Schema Registry ACLs are enabled, audit log entries include the fully qualified subject name for non-default context operations:

[source,json]
----
{
  "resources": [
    {
      "name": ":.staging:my-topic",
      "type": "subject"
    }
  ]
}
----

Default context subjects are logged with their unqualified name (no change from existing behavior).

== Metrics

The following Schema Registry metrics have been updated to include a `context` label, enabling per-context monitoring:

[cols="2,2", options="header"]
|===
| Metric | Change

| `*_schema_registry_cache_schema_count`
| New `context` label added.

| `*_schema_registry_cache_subject_count`
| New `context` label added.

| `*_schema_registry_cache_subject_version_count`
| New `context` label added.
|===

The count of non-default contexts is also included in Redpanda's phone-home telemetry.

For the full metrics reference, see xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc[].

== Upgrade considerations

[#upgrade-considerations]

[IMPORTANT]
====
*Breaking change*: When `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` is enabled, any existing subject whose name matches the qualified subject pattern — for example, `:.staging:user-value` — is reinterpreted as subject `user-value` in context `.staging`, rather than as a literal subject name in the default context. Subjects without a `:.` prefix are unaffected.

This edge case is expected to be rare. No automatic migration is provided.
====

To audit your existing subjects for affected names before enabling the feature:

ifndef::env-cloud[]
[source,bash]
----
rpk registry subject list | grep '^\.'
----
endif::env-cloud[]

ifdef::env-cloud[]
[source,bash]
----
curl -s http://<schema-registry-host>:8081/subjects | jq '.[] | select(startswith(":."))'
----
endif::env-cloud[]

If affected subjects are found, rename them before enabling the property, or plan to re-register them under the reinterpreted context structure after enabling.

In 26.2, if you need additional time to migrate, you can temporarily set `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` to `false` to restore literal behavior while you complete the migration. This option is removed in 26.3, after which contexts are always enabled.

[IMPORTANT]
====
Remember that changing `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` requires a broker restart in both directions (enabling and disabling).
====

== Troubleshooting

[#schema-id-lookup-fails]
=== Schema ID lookup returns 404 or wrong schema

*Symptom*: `GET /schemas/ids/{id}` returns a 404 or returns the wrong schema after registering a schema in a non-default context.

*Cause*: `GET /schemas/ids/{id}` searches the *default context only*. A schema registered in `:.staging:my-topic` (returning ID `1`) is not found by `GET /schemas/ids/1` without a context hint.

*Resolution*: Pass the `subject` query parameter to scope the lookup to the correct context:

[source,bash]
----
curl -s "http://localhost:8081/schemas/ids/1?subject=:.staging:my-topic"
----

=== Qualified subjects not recognized (treated as literal names)

*Symptom*: Subjects with the `:.` prefix are stored as literal subject names in the default context instead of being parsed as context-qualified subjects.

*Cause 1*: `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` is set to `false` (the 26.1 default for self-managed clusters).

*Cause 2*: The property was set to `true` but the brokers have not yet been restarted. This property is not dynamic and requires a full broker restart to take effect.

*Resolution*:

ifndef::env-cloud[]
[source,bash]
----
rpk cluster config set schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects true
# Then restart all brokers
----
endif::env-cloud[]

=== Schema registration fails after upgrading to 26.1

*Symptom*: A `POST /subjects/{subject}/versions` request returns an unexpected error after upgrading and enabling the flag.

*Cause*: An existing subject whose name begins with `:.` has been reinterpreted as a context-qualified subject. If the inferred context was pre-configured in `READONLY` mode, new registrations are rejected.

*Resolution*: Check for affected subject names:

ifndef::env-cloud[]
[source,bash]
----
rpk registry subject list | grep '^\.'
----
endif::env-cloud[]

Rename affected subjects or change the inferred context's mode:

[source,bash]
----
curl -s -X PUT http://localhost:8081/mode/:.affected-context: \
  -H "Content-Type: application/vnd.schemaregistry.v1+json" \
  -d '{"mode": "READWRITE"}'
----

=== Context cannot be deleted

*Symptom*: `DELETE /contexts/{context}` returns a `context_not_empty` error even though all subjects appear to have been deleted.

*Cause*: Soft-deleted subjects still count toward the non-empty check. Subjects must be hard-deleted (permanently deleted) before the context can be removed. Also note that the default context (`.`) cannot be deleted under any circumstances.

*Resolution*: Hard-delete all subjects in the context, then retry:

[source,bash]
----
# Soft-delete (if not already done)
curl -s -X DELETE "http://localhost:8081/subjects/:.staging:my-topic"

# Hard-delete (permanent)
curl -s -X DELETE "http://localhost:8081/subjects/:.staging:my-topic?permanent=true"

# Retry context deletion
curl -s -X DELETE http://localhost:8081/contexts/.staging
----

=== `GET /contexts` does not list my context

*Symptom*: A context that you believe exists does not appear in `GET /contexts`.

*Cause*: A context is only materialized (and returned by `GET /contexts`) after at least one schema has been registered in it. Pre-configuring mode or compatibility does not create a listed context.

*Resolution*: Register at least one schema in the context to materialize it, or verify that at least one subject exists under the context.

=== Cross-context reference resolution fails

*Symptom*: A schema registration that includes references to subjects in another context fails with a subject-not-found error.

*Cause*: Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve within the same context as the root schema, not in the default context.

*Resolution*: Use fully qualified references in the schema definition:

[source,json]
----
{
  "references": [
    {
      "name": "CommonType",
      "subject": ":.shared:CommonType",
      "version": 1
    }
  ]
}
----

=== `referencedby` returns IDs with no context information

*Symptom*: `GET /subjects/{subject}/versions/{version}/referencedby` returns schema IDs, but you cannot determine which context each ID belongs to.

*Cause*: This is a known limitation of the `referencedby` endpoint. It returns bare schema IDs with no context metadata. When references span contexts, the returned IDs are ambiguous.

*Resolution*: There is no workaround in 26.1. To identify which schema an ID belongs to, try resolving the ID against each relevant context using `GET /schemas/ids/{id}?subject=:<context>:<subject>`.

== Related topics

* xref:manage:schema-reg/schema-reg-overview.adoc[]
* xref:manage:schema-reg/schema-reg-api.adoc[]
* xref:manage:schema-reg/schema-reg-authorization.adoc[]
* xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc[]
ifndef::env-cloud[]
* xref:reference:cluster-properties.adoc[]
endif::env-cloud[]
ifdef::env-cloud[]
* xref:reference:properties/cluster-properties.adoc[]
endif::env-cloud[]
```

+
ifndef::env-cloud[]
[NOTE]
====
Starting in v26.1, `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` defaults to `false`. You must explicitly enable it for self-managed clusters or to test in a non-Serverless environment.
====
endif::env-cloud[]
+
ifdef::env-cloud[]
[NOTE]
====
On Serverless, contexts are enabled by default. On BYOC and Dedicated clusters, `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` defaults to `false`.
====
endif::env-cloud[]

* If you use Schema Registry ACLs, ensure that the principal interacting with a context has the appropriate permissions. See <<acl-authorization>>.

== Limitations

* *Console, rpk, and Kubernetes Operator*: Do not support contexts in Redpanda v26.1. Use the Schema Registry HTTP API directly. 
* *Cross-context isolation*: Contexts provide organizational isolation (separate ID spaces, subject namespaces, and configuration), not full data isolation. Schemas in one context can reference schemas in another context.
* *Blocking cross-context references*: There is no mechanism to prevent cross-context schema references.
* *DR/RPCN syncing into specific contexts*: Syncing schemas from remote clusters directly into a named context is not supported.

> * *WASM integration*: Context-aware schema IDs are not yet surfaced in WASM data transforms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *WASM integration*: Context-aware schema IDs are not surfaced in WASM data transforms.
```

=== Use a context as the base URL

You can point a client at a specific context by setting the client's base URL to `${host}/contexts/{context}`. Redpanda rewrites requests under this path prefix to operate within the specified context automatically. For example:

----
# All requests to this base URL operate within the .production context
http://localhost:8081/contexts/.production
----

A client with this base URL making a `GET /schemas/ids/42` request would retrieve schema ID 42 from the `.production` context.

=== Set a pre-configured mode on a non-existent context

You can set mode or compatibility on a context before any schemas are registered in it. When the first schema is registered under that context, it immediately inherits the pre-configured settings:

[source,bash]
----
# Pre-configure a context that does not yet exist
curl -s -X PUT \
  http://localhost:8081/mode/:.new-team: \
  -H "Content-Type: application/vnd.schemaregistry.v1+json" \
  -d '{"mode": "READONLY"}'

# Any attempt to register a schema in :.new-team: will now be rejected
# until the mode is changed to READWRITE
----

=== Delete a context

> A context can be deleted only when it has no subjects (or all subjects have been hard-deleted). Attempting to delete a non-empty context returns a `ContextNotEmpty` error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can only delete a context when it has no subjects (or all subjects have been hard-deleted). Attempting to delete a non-empty context returns a `ContextNotEmpty` error.
```

[source,bash]
----
curl -s -X DELETE http://localhost:8081/contexts/.staging
----

=== Cross-context schema references

Schemas can reference schemas in other contexts using qualified subject names in the `references` field:

[source,json]
----
{
  "schema": "...",
  "references": [
    {
      "name": "Address",
      "subject": ":.shared:Address",
      "version": 1
    }
  ]
}
----

Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve to the same context as the root schema, not to the default context.

== Cluster configuration property

The following cluster configuration property controls whether qualified subject parsing is enabled.

`schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects`::
+
[cols="1,3"]
|===
| Type | Boolean
| Default (26.1) | `false`
| Default (26.2+) | `true`
|===
+

> When set to `false`, subjects are treated as literal strings (existing behavior). When set to `true`, subjects matching the `:<context>:<subject>` pattern are parsed as context-qualified subjects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When set to `false`, subjects are treated as literal strings. When set to `true`, subjects matching the `:<context>:<subject>` pattern are parsed as context-qualified subjects.
```

+
ifndef::env-cloud[]
Configure using `rpk`:
+
[source,bash]
----
rpk cluster config set schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects true
----
endif::env-cloud[]

== rpk commands

[NOTE]
====

> Native `rpk` commands for managing contexts (for example, listing, creating, or deleting contexts) are not available in 26.1. Use the Schema Registry HTTP API directly. rpk support for contexts will be delivered in a future release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Native `rpk` commands for managing contexts (for example, listing, creating, or deleting contexts) are not available in v26.1. Use the Schema Registry HTTP API directly. 
```

# Delete a subject within a context
rpk registry subject delete \
  --subject ":.production:user-events-value"
----

For full reference documentation on these commands, see:

* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-schema-create.adoc[rpk registry schema create]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-schema-list.adoc[rpk registry schema list]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-schema-get.adoc[rpk registry schema get]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-schema-check-compatibility.adoc[rpk registry schema check-compatibility]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-compatibility-level-get.adoc[rpk registry compatibility-level get]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-compatibility-level-set.adoc[rpk registry compatibility-level set]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-mode-get.adoc[rpk registry mode get]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-mode-set.adoc[rpk registry mode set]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-subject-delete.adoc[rpk registry subject delete]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-subject-list.adoc[rpk registry subject list]

== ACL authorization

[#acl-authorization]

> Contexts use the existing `sr_subject` and `sr_registry` ACL resource types. No new resource types are needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Contexts use the existing `sr_subject` and `sr_registry` ACL resource types.
```

=== Grant access to all subjects in a context

Use a prefix ACL on `sr_subject` with the context prefix `:<context>:` to grant access to all subjects within a context:

[source,bash]
----
rpk security acl create \
  --allow-principal User:team-a \
  --operation read,write,describe \
  --registry-subject ":.team-a:" \
  --brokers <brokers>
----

This ACL matches `:.team-a:*`, granting the principal access to every subject in the `.team-a` context.

=== Context-level mode and config operations

Context-level mode and compatibility (`PUT /mode/:<context>:` and `PUT /config/:<context>:`) require `sr_registry` permission with the `alter_configs` operation—consistent with global mode and config endpoints.

Subject-level operations (`PUT /mode/:<context>:<subject>` and `PUT /config/:<context>:<subject>`) require `sr_subject` permission on the specific subject.

=== Audit log format

When Schema Registry ACLs are enabled, audit log entries include the fully qualified subject name for non-default context operations:

[source,json]
----
{
  "resources": [
    {
      "name": ":.production:user-events-value",
      "type": "subject"
    }
  ]
}
----

> Default context subjects are logged with their unqualified name (no change from existing behavior).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Default context subjects are logged with their unqualified name.
```

== Metrics

The following Schema Registry metrics have been updated to include a `context` label, enabling per-context monitoring:

[cols="2,2", options="header"]
|===

> | Metric | Change

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Metric | Update
```

| `*_schema_registry_cache_schema_count`
| New `context` label added.

| `*_schema_registry_cache_subject_count`
| New `context` label added.

| `*_schema_registry_cache_subject_version_count`
| New `context` label added.
|===

For the full metrics reference, see xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc[Public Metrics Reference].

== Upgrade considerations

[#upgrade-considerations]

[IMPORTANT]
====
*Breaking change*: When `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` is enabled, any existing subject whose name matches the qualified subject pattern—for example, `:.staging:user-value`—is reinterpreted as subject `user-value` in context `.staging`, rather than as a literal subject name in the default context. Subjects without a `:.` prefix are unaffected.
====

> This edge case is expected to be rare. To audit your existing subjects for affected names before enabling the feature:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the necessity of doing so is rare, you can audit your existing subjects for affected names before enabling contexts:
```

ifndef::env-cloud[]
[source,bash]
----
rpk registry subject list | grep '^:\.'
----
endif::env-cloud[]

ifdef::env-cloud[]
[source,bash]
----
curl -s http://<schema-registry-host>:8081/subjects | jq '.[] | select(startswith(":."))'
----
endif::env-cloud[]

If affected subjects are found, rename them before enabling the property, or plan to rename them after enabling and re-register any schemas under the reinterpreted context structure.

> In 26.2, if you need additional time to migrate, you can temporarily set `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` to `false` to preserve the existing literal behavior while you complete the migration. This option is removed in 26.3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

*Resolution*: Check whether the subject name matches the qualified pattern:

ifndef::env-cloud[]
[source,bash]
----
rpk registry subject list | grep '^:\.'
----
endif::env-cloud[]

Rename affected subjects if needed, or change the context mode:

[source,bash]
----
curl -s -X PUT http://localhost:8081/mode/:<affected-context>: \
  -H "Content-Type: application/vnd.schemaregistry.v1+json" \
  -d '{"mode": "READWRITE"}'
----

=== `GET /contexts` returns an empty list or does not include my context

*Symptom*: A context that you believe exists does not appear in `GET /contexts`.

*Cause*: A context is only listed after at least one schema has been registered in it (creating the internal `CONTEXT` record). Pre-configuring a mode or compatibility setting alone does not create a listed context.

*Resolution*: Register a schema in the context to materialize it, or verify that at least one subject exists under the context.

=== Qualified subjects not recognized (subjects treated as literal names)

*Symptom*: Subjects with the `:.` prefix are stored as literal subject names in the default context rather than being parsed as context-qualified subjects.

> *Cause*: `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` is set to `false` (the 26.1 default for self-managed clusters).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Cause*: `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` is set to `false`, which is the default for self-managed clusters).
```

*Resolution*:

ifndef::env-cloud[]
[source,bash]
----
rpk cluster config set schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects true
----
endif::env-cloud[]

=== Cross-context reference resolution fails

*Symptom*: A schema registration that includes references to subjects in another context fails with a subject-not-found error.

*Cause*: Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve within the same context as the root schema, not in the default context.

*Resolution*: Use a fully qualified reference in the schema definition:

[source,json]
----
{
  "references": [
    {
      "name": "Address",
      "subject": ":.shared:Address",
      "version": 1
    }
  ]
}
----

=== Context cannot be deleted

*Symptom*: `DELETE /contexts/{context}` returns a `ContextNotEmpty` error.

> *Cause*: The context still has subjects that have not been fully deleted (hard-deleted).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Cause*: The context still has subjects that have not been fully deleted (hard-delete).
```

> *Resolution*: Delete all subjects within the context before deleting the context itself. Use a soft delete followed by a permanent (hard) delete:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Resolution*: Delete all subjects within the context before deleting the context itself. Use a soft delete followed by a hard delete, which is permanent:
```

= Schema Registry Contexts
:description: Use Schema Registry contexts to create isolated namespaces for schemas, subjects, and configuration—enabling multi-tenant and multi-team deployments without separate Schema Registry instances.
:page-tags: [Schema Registry, contexts, multi-tenant, Confluent compatibility]
Learning objectives:
:learning-objective-1: Understand what Schema Registry contexts are and when to use them.
:learning-objective-2: Understand the qualified subject syntax (:<context>:<subject>).
:learning-objective-3: Enable the feature using the cluster configuration property (requires broker restart), and configuring contexts, including per-context mode and compatibility settings.
:learning-objective-4: Apply ACLs to control access at the context level.
:learning-objective-5: Identify updated metrics and the new cluster configuration property.
:learning-objective-6: Resolve common issues related to upgrade, schema ID lookups, and subject naming.

// Single-sourcing tags: Cloud-only content is wrapped in ifdef::env-cloud[] ... endif::[]
// Self-managed-only content is wrapped in ifndef::env-cloud[] ... endif::[]

> // tag::single-source[]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// tag::single-source[]

After reading this page, you will be able to:
* [ ] {learning-objective-1}
* [ ] {learning-objective-2}
* [ ] {learning-objective-3}
* [ ] {learning-objective-4}
* [ ] {learning-objective-5}
* [ ] {learning-objective-6}
```

= Schema Registry Contexts
:description: Use Schema Registry contexts to create isolated namespaces for schemas, subjects, and configuration—enabling multi-tenant and multi-team deployments without separate Schema Registry instances.
:page-tags: [Schema Registry, contexts, multi-tenant, Confluent compatibility]
// Learning objectives:
// - Understand what Schema Registry contexts are and when to use them.
// - Understand the qualified subject syntax (:<context>:<subject>).
// - Enable the feature using the cluster configuration property (requires broker restart).
// - Configure contexts, including per-context mode and compatibility settings.
// - Apply ACLs to control access at the context level.
// - Identify updated metrics and the new cluster configuration property.

> // - Resolve common issues related to upgrade, schema ID lookups, and subject naming.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Learning objectives:
:learning-objective-1: Understand what Schema Registry contexts are and when to use them.
:learning-objective-2: Understand the qualified subject syntax (:<context>:<subject>).
:learning-objective-3: Enable the feature using the cluster configuration property (requires broker restart), and configuring contexts, including per-context mode and compatibility settings.
:learning-objective-4: Apply ACLs to control access at the context level.
:learning-objective-5: Identify updated metrics and the new cluster configuration property.
:learning-objective-6: Resolve common issues related to upgrade, schema ID lookups, and subject naming.
```

= Schema Registry Contexts

> :description: Use Schema Registry contexts to create isolated namespaces for schemas, subjects, and configuration—enabling multi-tenant and multi-team deployments without separate Schema Registry instances.

Reviewer: **Style: Em dash in `:description:`**

The style guide prohibits em dashes. Use a comma instead:

```asciidoc
:description: Use Schema Registry contexts to create isolated namespaces for schemas, subjects, and configuration, enabling multi-tenant and multi-team deployments without separate Schema Registry instances.
```

> :description: Use Schema Registry contexts to create isolated namespaces for schemas, subjects, and configuration—enabling multi-tenant and multi-team deployments without separate Schema Registry instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:description: Use Schema Registry contexts to create isolated namespaces for schemas, subjects, and configuration, enabling multi-tenant and multi-team deployments without separate Schema Registry instances.
```

> :page-tags: [Schema Registry, contexts, multi-tenant, Confluent compatibility]

Reviewer: **Missing required metadata: `:page-topic-type:` and `:personas:`**

Both attributes are required on every page. Suggested:

```asciidoc
:page-topic-type: how-to
:personas: app_developer, streaming_developer, platform_admin
```

> :page-tags: [Schema Registry, contexts, multi-tenant, Confluent compatibility]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:page-tags: [Schema Registry, contexts, multi-tenant, Confluent compatibility]
:page-topic-type: how-to
:personas: app_developer, streaming_developer, platform_admin
```

> Learning objectives:

Reviewer: **Bug: `Learning objectives:` renders as visible page text**

This line is not a valid AsciiDoc attribute or comment — it will render as a paragraph on the page. Remove it.

> Learning objectives:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> :learning-objective-1: Understand what Schema Registry contexts are and when to use them.

Reviewer: **Style: "Understand" is not an observable/measurable verb**

Per the learning objectives standard, "Understand" is not measurable. Replace with verbs from the awareness, comprehension, or skill categories. Objective 3 is also compound (covers multiple outcomes in one). Suggested:

```asciidoc
:learning-objective-1: Identify when to use Schema Registry contexts for multi-team or multi-cluster deployments.
:learning-objective-2: Describe how qualified subject syntax maps subjects to contexts.
:learning-objective-3: Enable and configure Schema Registry contexts using the cluster property and HTTP API.
```

> :learning-objective-2: Understand the qualified subject syntax (`:<context>:<subject>`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:learning-objective-2: Understand the qualified subject syntax.
```

> :learning-objective-3: Enable the feature using the cluster configuration property (requires broker restart), and configuring contexts, including per-context mode and compatibility settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:learning-objective-1: Identify when to use Schema Registry contexts for multi-team or multi-cluster deployments.
:learning-objective-2: Describe how qualified subject syntax maps subjects to contexts.
:learning-objective-3: Enable and configure Schema Registry contexts using the cluster property and HTTP API.
```

// Single-sourcing tags: Cloud-only content is wrapped in ifdef::env-cloud[] ... endif::[]
// Self-managed-only content is wrapped in ifndef::env-cloud[] ... endif::[]

// tag::single-source[]

After reading this page, you will be able to:

* [ ] {learning-objective-1}
* [ ] {learning-objective-2}
* [ ] {learning-objective-3}

Schema Registry contexts are namespaces that isolate schemas, subjects, and configurations from one another within a single Schema Registry instance.
Each context maintains its own schema ID counter, mode settings, and compatibility settings.

> Existing schemas will simply continue to work: unqualified subjects remain in the implicit default context

Reviewer: **Two issues on this line**

1. Remove `simply` — it's a filler word per the Google style guide.
2. Missing period at end of sentence: add `.` after `implicit default context`.

```asciidoc
Existing schemas will continue to work: unqualified subjects remain in the implicit default context.
```

> Existing schemas will simply continue to work: unqualified subjects remain in the implicit default context

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Existing schemas will continue to work: unqualified subjects remain in the implicit default context.
```

> Schema Registry contexts is compatible with the Confluent Schema Registry Contexts API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Schema Registry contexts are namespaces that isolate schemas, subjects, and configurations from one another within a single Schema Registry instance.
Each context maintains its own schema ID counter, mode settings, and compatibility settings.
Existing schemas will simply continue to work: unqualified subjects remain in the implicit default context

Schema Registry contexts are compatible with the Confluent Schema Registry Contexts API.

After reading this page, you will be able to:

* [ ] {learning-objective-1}
* [ ] {learning-objective-2}
* [ ] {learning-objective-3}

```

> Schema Registry contexts is compatible with the Confluent Schema Registry Contexts API.

Reviewer: **Bug: Subject-verb agreement**

`Schema Registry contexts` is plural — use `are`, not `is`:

```asciidoc
Schema Registry contexts are compatible with the Confluent Schema Registry Contexts API.
```

== When to use contexts

Contexts are most useful in the following scenarios:

* *Multi-team deployments on a shared cluster*: Teams can register schemas independently under their own contexts without risking naming collisions or configuration drift.
* *Schema migration from Confluent Schema Registry*: Confluent Schema Registry uses contexts to namespace schemas. If your existing workflows or tooling rely on contexts, Redpanda's compatible implementation lets you migrate without restructuring your schema layout.
* *Multi-cluster schema syncing and disaster recovery*: Dedicated namespaces reduce schema ID collision risk when syncing schemas across clusters.

ifdef::env-cloud[]
NOTE: On Serverless clusters, Redpanda uses contexts internally for per-tenant isolation. Contexts are not exposed to end users on Serverless. On BYOC and Dedicated clusters, contexts are available and user-configurable.
endif::env-cloud[]

== Prerequisites

Before using Schema Registry contexts, ensure that:

> * You are running Redpanda v26.1 or later.

Reviewer: **Style: Prerequisites must be linked**

Per the style guide, every prerequisite should link to where users can fulfill it. Add a link to the release notes or upgrade guide for the version requirement:

```asciidoc
* You are running xref:get-started:release-notes/redpanda.adoc[Redpanda v26.1] or later.
```

> * You are running Redpanda v26.1 or later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You are running xref:get-started:release-notes/redpanda.adoc[Redpanda v26.1] or later.
```

> * The `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` cluster configuration property is set to `true`.

Reviewer: **Style: Prerequisites must be linked**

Link this prerequisite to the property reference page:

```asciidoc
* The xref:reference:properties/cluster-properties.adoc#schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects[`schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects`] cluster configuration property is set to `true`.
```

> * The `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` cluster configuration property is set to `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The xref:reference:properties/cluster-properties.adoc#schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects[`schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects`] cluster configuration property is set to `true`.
```

* *Non-Java SerDe clients*: Non-Java serializer/deserializer clients do not natively support qualified subjects. Instead, point these clients at the `/contexts/{context}/...` base URL path prefix. See <<client-integration-status>>.
* *Server-side schema ID validation*: Schema ID validation using Kafka record headers does not support contexts.
* *Iceberg topics*: Context-aware schema IDs are not surfaced in Iceberg topic integration.
* *`referencedby` endpoint*: `GET /subjects/{subject}/versions/{version}/referencedby` returns a list of bare schema IDs with no context information. When references span contexts, it is not possible to determine which context each returned ID belongs to.
* *Cross-context isolation*: Contexts provide organizational and ID-space isolation, but do not prevent cross-context schema references. There is no mechanism to block schemas in one context from referencing schemas in another context.
* *Default context cannot be deleted*: You cannot delete the default context (`.`).

> * *Breaking change on upgrade*: After enabling `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects`, any existing subject whose name matches the qualified subject pattern (for example, `:.staging:user-value`) is reinterpreted as subject `user-value` in context `.staging` rather than as a literal subject name in the default context. See <<upgrade-considerations>>.

Reviewer: **Bug: Broken anchor reference on Cloud renders**

`<<upgrade-considerations>>` is referenced here unconditionally, but the target anchor `[#upgrade-considerations]` is defined inside `ifndef::env-cloud[]`. On Cloud builds, the anchor doesn't exist, producing a broken link.

Either wrap this `See <<upgrade-considerations>>` in the same `ifndef::env-cloud[]` conditional, or move the anchor definition outside the conditional block.

See also <<schema-id-lookup-fails>>.

=== Configuration resolution order

Prior to v26.1, mode and compatibility settings resolved as:

----
Subject → Global → Built-in defaults
----

After enabling contexts, a context layer sits between subject and global:

----
Subject → Context → Global (.:.__GLOBAL:) → Built-in defaults
----

For example, setting the `.staging` context to `IMPORT` mode means all subjects in `.staging` inherit `IMPORT` unless they have a subject-level override, even if the global mode is `READWRITE`.

Use `defaultToGlobal=true` on `GET /config` and `GET /mode` requests to see the effective value after full fallback resolution.

=== Qualified subject syntax

Wherever the Schema Registry API accepts a subject, you can supply a qualified subject instead of a bare subject name:

[cols="2,1,2", options="header"]
|===
| Input | Context | Subject

| `user-events-value`
| `.` (default)
| `user-events-value`

| `:.staging:user-events-value`
| `.staging`
| `user-events-value`

| `:.:user-events-value`
| `.` (default)
| `user-events-value`

| `:.staging:`
| `.staging`
| (empty — used for context-level config/mode operations)
|===

=== `GET /subjects` behavior change

> After enabling the flag, `GET /subjects` (with no `subjectPrefix`) returns subjects across _all_ contexts. Non-default context subjects appear with their qualified names (for example, `:.staging:my-topic`). Note that this is differs from the previous flat lists of bare subject names.

Reviewer: **Bug: Grammatical error**

```asciidoc
// Bad
Note that this is differs from the previous flat lists of bare subject names.
// Fix
Note that this differs from the previous flat lists of bare subject names.
```

> After enabling the flag, `GET /subjects` (with no `subjectPrefix`) returns subjects across _all_ contexts. Non-default context subjects appear with their qualified names (for example, `:.staging:my-topic`). Note that this is differs from the previous flat lists of bare subject names.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After enabling the flag, `GET /subjects` (with no `subjectPrefix`) returns subjects across _all_ contexts. Non-default context subjects appear with their qualified names (for example, `:.staging:my-topic`). 
Note that this differs from the previous flat lists of bare subject names.
```

=== Cross-context schema references

Contexts do not enforce isolation of schema references. Schemas can reference schemas in any other context. Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve within the same context as the root schema, not the default context. Qualified references can reach any context explicitly (for example, `:.shared:CommonType`).

== Enable Schema Registry contexts

ifndef::env-cloud[]
To enable contexts, set the `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` cluster configuration property to `true`:

[source,bash]
----
rpk cluster config set schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects true
----

[IMPORTANT]
====
This property requires a broker restart. The change does not take effect until all brokers have restarted.
====

To verify the current setting:

[source,bash]
----
rpk cluster config get schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects
----
endif::env-cloud[]

ifdef::env-cloud[]
NOTE: On BYOC and Dedicated clusters, contact Redpanda support or use the cluster configuration API to enable `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects`. This property requires a broker restart.
endif::env-cloud[]

> == Configure Schema Registry contexts

Reviewer: **Style: Missing intro text before child heading**

The `== Configure Schema Registry contexts` section jumps straight into `=== Register a schema in a context` with no intro text. The sentence "The following configuration examples show how to perform common context operations..." should appear between the H2 and the first H3 to orient readers before the subsections.

> == Configure Schema Registry contexts
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Configure Schema Registry contexts

Following are the various configuration options available for Schema Registry contexts.

```

# Get the current global mode
curl -s http://localhost:8081/mode/:.__GLOBAL:

# Set global default compatibility
curl -s -X PUT \
  http://localhost:8081/config/:.__GLOBAL: \
  -H "Content-Type: application/vnd.schemaregistry.v1+json" \
  -d '{"compatibility": "FULL"}'
----

NOTE: `.__GLOBAL` is a reserved context name and cannot be used as a regular context name.

=== Retrieve schema references with qualified names

Use `referenceFormat=qualified` on `GET /subjects/{subject}/versions/{version}` to return references with context-qualified subject names instead of bare names:

[source,bash]
----
curl -s "http://localhost:8081/subjects/:.staging:my-topic/versions/1?referenceFormat=qualified"
----

This is useful when schemas span multiple contexts and you need to disambiguate reference targets.

=== Use a context as the client base URL

You can point a Schema Registry client at a specific context by setting the client's Schema Registry URL to `${host}/contexts/{context}`. Redpanda rewrites requests under this path prefix to operate within the specified context. This is the recommended workaround for non-Java SerDe clients that do not yet support qualified subject syntax natively:

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

[source,text]
```

> ----

Reviewer: **Minor: Code block missing language specifier**

This code block has no language identifier. Add `[source,text]` before the opening `----` for consistency with the rest of the page and to improve screen reader accessibility.

rpk registry subject list

# Grant read access to all subjects in a context (prefix ACL)
rpk security acl create \
  --registry-subject ":.staging:" \
  --resource-pattern-type prefixed \
  --operation read \
  --allow-principal User:alice
----

For additional detail, refer to the full reference documentation for these commands:

* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-schema-create.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-schema-list.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-schema-get.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-schema-check-compatibility.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-compatibility-level-get.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-compatibility-level-set.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-mode-get.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-mode-set.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-subject-delete.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-subject-list.adoc[]

== Client integration status

The following table identifies the support level of Schema Registry context client integrations.

> [#client-integration-status]

Reviewer: **Bug: Anchor placed after heading instead of before it**

`[#client-integration-status]` is placed after the intro text, not above the section heading. Internal links to this anchor jump to the paragraph, not the heading. Move it:

```asciidoc
[#client-integration-status]
== Client integration status
```

> [#client-integration-status]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[#client-integration-status]
== Client integration status

The following table identifies the support level of Schema Registry context client integrations.

```

[cols="2,1,3", options="header"]
|===
| Client | Status | Notes

| Schema Registry API (all operations)
| Supported
| Use qualified subjects directly in any endpoint.

| Java SerDe (Confluent)
| Supported
| Requires a custom `ContextNameStrategy`. See the Confluent SerDe documentation for details.

| Non-Java SerDe
| Not supported
| Workaround: set the client's Schema Registry base URL to `http://<host>:8081/contexts/{context}`.

| rpk
| Not supported
| Context management commands not available. Qualified subjects work in existing `rpk registry` commands.

| Redpanda Console
| Not supported

> | 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|  N/A
```

> 

Reviewer: **Content: Empty Notes cells**

The Notes column for `Redpanda Console` and `Server-side schema ID validation` is empty. Add a brief note (for example, "No workaround available. Use the HTTP API directly.") or at minimum `N/A` to avoid the appearance of unfinished content.

| Server-side schema ID validation
| Not supported

> | 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|  N/A
```

|===

> == ACL authorization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[#acl-authorization]
== ACL authorization
```

> [#acl-authorization]

Reviewer: **Bug: Anchor placed after heading instead of before it**

Same issue as `[#client-integration-status]`. The `[#acl-authorization]` anchor is placed after the heading, so links to it jump past the heading text. Move it above the heading:

```asciidoc
[#acl-authorization]
== ACL authorization
```

[source,bash]
----
rpk security acl create \
  --registry-subject ":.staging:" \
  --resource-pattern-type prefixed \
  --operation read \
  --allow-principal User:alice \
  --brokers <brokers>
----

=== Audit log format

When you enable Schema Registry ACLs, audit log entries include the fully qualified subject name for non-default context operations:

[source,json]
----
{
  "resources": [
    {
      "name": ":.staging:my-topic",
      "type": "subject"
    }
  ]
}
----

Default context subjects are logged with their unqualified name.

== Metrics

The following Schema Registry metrics include a `context` label, enabling per-context monitoring:

[cols="2,2", options="header"]
|===
| Metric | Change

| `*_schema_registry_cache_schema_count`
| New `context` label added.

| `*_schema_registry_cache_subject_count`
| New `context` label added.

| `*_schema_registry_cache_subject_version_count`
| New `context` label added.
|===

The count of non-default contexts is also included in Redpanda's phone-home telemetry.

For the full metrics reference, see xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc[].

ifndef::env-cloud[]
== Upgrade considerations

> [#upgrade-considerations]

Reviewer: **Bug: Anchor inside `ifndef::env-cloud[]` breaks Cloud renders**

This `[#upgrade-considerations]` anchor is conditionally included (self-managed only), but `<<upgrade-considerations>>` is referenced unconditionally in the Limitations section. On Cloud builds the anchor target doesn't exist.

Move the anchor outside the conditional, or add a parallel Cloud section heading with the same anchor.

=== Cross-context reference resolution fails

*Symptom*: A schema registration that includes references to subjects in another context fails with a subject-not-found error.

*Cause*: Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve within the same context as the root schema, not in the default context.

*Resolution*: Use fully qualified references in the schema definition:

[source,json]
----
{
  "references": [
    {
      "name": "CommonType",
      "subject": ":.shared:CommonType",
      "version": 1
    }
  ]
}
----

=== `referencedby` returns IDs with no context information

*Symptom*: `GET /subjects/{subject}/versions/{version}/referencedby` returns schema IDs, but you cannot determine which context each ID belongs to.

*Cause*: This is a known limitation of the `referencedby` endpoint. It returns bare schema IDs with no context metadata. When references span contexts, the returned IDs are ambiguous.

*Resolution*: There is no workaround. To identify which schema an ID belongs to, try resolving the ID against each relevant context using `GET /schemas/ids/{id}?subject=:<context>:<subject>`.

> == Related topics

Reviewer: **Consistency: Use `== Suggested reading` instead of `== Related topics`**

Every other page in the schema-reg section (including `schema-reg-api.adoc`) uses `== Suggested reading`. Please match for consistency.

> == Related topics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Suggested reading
```

:page-tags: [Schema Registry, contexts, multi-tenant, Confluent compatibility]
Learning objectives:
:learning-objective-1: Understand what Schema Registry contexts are and when to use them.
:learning-objective-2: Understand the qualified subject syntax (:<context>:<subject>).
:learning-objective-3: Enable the feature using the cluster configuration property (requires broker restart), and configuring contexts, including per-context mode and compatibility settings.
:learning-objective-4: Apply ACLs to control access at the context level.
:learning-objective-5: Identify updated metrics and the new cluster configuration property.
:learning-objective-6: Resolve common issues related to upgrade, schema ID lookups, and subject naming.

// Single-sourcing tags: Cloud-only content is wrapped in ifdef::env-cloud[] ... endif::[]
// Self-managed-only content is wrapped in ifndef::env-cloud[] ... endif::[]

// tag::single-source[]

After reading this page, you will be able to:

* [ ] {learning-objective-1}
* [ ] {learning-objective-2}
* [ ] {learning-objective-3}
* [ ] {learning-objective-4}
* [ ] {learning-objective-5}

> * [ ] {learning-objective-6}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [ ] {learning-objective-1}
* [ ] {learning-objective-2}
* [ ] {learning-objective-3}
* [ ] {learning-objective-4}
* [ ] {learning-objective-5}
* [ ] {learning-objective-6}
* [ ] 

```

= Schema Registry Contexts
:description: Use Schema Registry contexts to create isolated namespaces for schemas, subjects, and configuration—enabling multi-tenant and multi-team deployments without separate Schema Registry instances.
:page-tags: [Schema Registry, contexts, multi-tenant, Confluent compatibility]
Learning objectives:
:learning-objective-1: Understand what Schema Registry contexts are and when to use them.

> :learning-objective-2: Understand the qualified subject syntax (:<context>:<subject>).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:learning-objective-2: Understand the qualified subject syntax (`:<context>:<subject>`).
```

:learning-objective-3: Enable the feature using the cluster configuration property (requires broker restart), and configuring contexts, including per-context mode and compatibility settings.
:learning-objective-4: Apply ACLs to control access at the context level.
:learning-objective-5: Identify updated metrics and the new cluster configuration property.
:learning-objective-6: Resolve common issues related to upgrade, schema ID lookups, and subject naming.

// Single-sourcing tags: Cloud-only content is wrapped in ifdef::env-cloud[] ... endif::[]
// Self-managed-only content is wrapped in ifndef::env-cloud[] ... endif::[]

// tag::single-source[]

After reading this page, you will be able to:

* [ ] {learning-objective-1}
* [ ] {learning-objective-2}
* [ ] {learning-objective-3}
* [ ] {learning-objective-4}
* [ ] {learning-objective-5}
* [ ] {learning-objective-6}

> * [ ] 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* *Server-side schema ID validation*: Schema ID validation using Kafka record headers does not support contexts.
* *Iceberg topics*: Context-aware schema IDs are not surfaced in Iceberg topic integration.
* *`referencedby` endpoint*: `GET /subjects/{subject}/versions/{version}/referencedby` returns a list of bare schema IDs with no context information. When references span contexts, it is not possible to determine which context each returned ID belongs to.
* *Cross-context isolation*: Contexts provide organizational and ID-space isolation, but do not prevent cross-context schema references. There is no mechanism to block schemas in one context from referencing schemas in another context.
* *Default context cannot be deleted*: You cannot delete the default context (`.`).
* *Breaking change on upgrade*: After enabling `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects`, any existing subject whose name matches the qualified subject pattern (for example, `:.staging:user-value`) is reinterpreted as subject `user-value` in context `.staging` rather than as a literal subject name in the default context. See <<upgrade-considerations>>.

== How Schema Registry contexts work

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you enable contexts, Schema Registry changes how it assigns schema IDs, resolves configuration, and interprets subject names.

```

=== Schema ID isolation

> Before contexts, the Schema Registry maintained a single global ID counter. All schemas shared one ID space, and a given schema ID pointed to exactly one schema across the entire registry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prior to v26.1, the Schema Registry maintained a single global ID counter. All schemas shared one ID space, and a given schema ID pointed to exactly one schema across the entire registry.
```

> After enabling contexts, each context has its own independent ID counter. This means schema ID `1` in `.staging` and schema ID `1` in `.production` are different schemas. As a result (and by default), `GET /schemas/ids/{id}` searches the _default context only_. To retrieve a schema by ID from a non-default context, you must pass the `subject` query parameter to scope the lookup:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Schema Registry contexts, each context has its own independent ID counter. This means schema ID `1` in `.staging` and schema ID `1` in `.production` are different schemas. As a result (and by default), `GET /schemas/ids/{id}` searches the _default context only_. To retrieve a schema by ID from a non-default context, you must pass the `subject` query parameter to scope the lookup:
```

[source,bash]
----
GET /schemas/ids/1?subject=:.staging:my-topic
----

See also <<schema-id-lookup-fails>>.

=== Configuration resolution order

> Before contexts, mode and compatibility settings resolved as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prior to v26.1, mode and compatibility settings resolved as:
```

----
Subject → Global → Built-in defaults
----

After enabling contexts, a context layer sits between subject and global:

----
Subject → Context → Global (.:.__GLOBAL:) → Built-in defaults
----

For example, setting the `.staging` context to `IMPORT` mode means all subjects in `.staging` inherit `IMPORT` unless they have a subject-level override, even if the global mode is `READWRITE`.

Use `defaultToGlobal=true` on `GET /config` and `GET /mode` requests to see the effective value after full fallback resolution.

=== Qualified subject syntax

Wherever the Schema Registry API accepts a subject, you can supply a qualified subject instead of a bare subject name:

[cols="2,1,2", options="header"]
|===
| Input | Context | Subject

| `user-events-value`
| `.` (default)
| `user-events-value`

| `:.staging:user-events-value`
| `.staging`
| `user-events-value`

| `:.:user-events-value`
| `.` (default)
| `user-events-value`

| `:.staging:`
| `.staging`
| (empty — used for context-level config/mode operations)
|===

=== `GET /subjects` behavior change

> After enabling the flag, `GET /subjects` (with no `subjectPrefix`) returns subjects across *all* contexts. Non-default context subjects appear with their qualified names — for example, `:.staging:my-topic`. This is a behavioral change from the previous flat list of bare subject names.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After enabling the flag, `GET /subjects` (with no `subjectPrefix`) returns subjects across _all_ contexts. Non-default context subjects appear with their qualified names (for example, `:.staging:my-topic`). Note that this is differs from the previous flat lists of bare subject names.
```

=== Cross-context schema references

Contexts do not enforce isolation of schema references. Schemas can reference schemas in any other context. Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve within the same context as the root schema, not the default context. Qualified references can reach any context explicitly (for example, `:.shared:CommonType`).

== Enable Schema Registry contexts

ifndef::env-cloud[]

> To enable contexts on a self-managed cluster, set the `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` cluster configuration property to `true`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable contexts, set the `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` cluster configuration property to `true`:
```

[source,bash]
----
rpk cluster config set schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects true
----

[IMPORTANT]
====
This property requires a broker restart. The change does not take effect until all brokers have restarted.
====

To verify the current setting:

[source,bash]
----
rpk cluster config get schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects
----
endif::env-cloud[]

ifdef::env-cloud[]
NOTE: On BYOC and Dedicated clusters, contact Redpanda support or use the cluster configuration API to enable `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects`. This property requires a broker restart.
endif::env-cloud[]

== Configure Schema Registry contexts

=== Register a schema in a context

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The following configuration examples show how to perform common context operations using the Schema Registry HTTP API and qualified subject syntax.
```

----
# All requests to this base URL operate within the .staging context
http://localhost:8081/contexts/.staging
----

=== Pre-configure a context before registering schemas

You can set mode or compatibility on a context before any schemas are registered in it:

[source,bash]
----
curl -s -X PUT \
  http://localhost:8081/mode/:.new-team: \
  -H "Content-Type: application/vnd.schemaregistry.v1+json" \
  -d '{"mode": "READONLY"}'
----

Schema registrations in `:.new-team:` will be rejected until the mode is changed to `READWRITE`.

=== Cross-context schema references

Schemas can reference schemas in other contexts using qualified subject names in the `references` field:

[source,json]
----
{
  "schema": "...",
  "references": [
    {
      "name": "CommonType",
      "subject": ":.shared:CommonType",
      "version": 1
    }
  ]
}
----

Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve to the same context as the root schema, not the default context.

=== Delete a context

> A context can only be deleted when it contains no subjects. Soft-deleted subjects still count — you must hard-delete all subjects before the context can be removed. Attempting to delete a non-empty context returns a `context_not_empty` error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can only delete a context when it contains no subjects. Soft-deleted subjects still count; however, you must hard-delete all subjects before removing the context. Attempting to delete a non-empty context returns a `context_not_empty` error.
```

[NOTE]
====
The default context (`.`) cannot be deleted.
====

[source,bash]
----
# Hard-delete all subjects in the context first
curl -s -X DELETE "http://localhost:8081/subjects/:.staging:my-topic?permanent=true"

# Then delete the empty context
curl -s -X DELETE http://localhost:8081/contexts/.staging
----

> == rpk commands

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Configure Schema Registry contexts using rpk
```

[NOTE]
====

> Native `rpk` commands for context management operations (listing, creating, and deleting contexts) are not yet available. Use the Schema Registry HTTP API directly for context-level operations. See <<client-integration-status>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Native `rpk` commands for context management operations (listing, creating, and deleting contexts) are not available. Use the Schema Registry HTTP API for context-level operations. See <<client-integration-status>>.
```

rpk registry schema list \
  --subject ":.staging:my-topic"

# Get a specific schema version from a context
rpk registry schema get \
  --subject ":.staging:my-topic" \
  --version 1

# Check compatibility for a subject in a context
rpk registry schema check-compatibility \
  --subject ":.staging:my-topic" \
  --schema my-schema-v2.avsc

# Get the compatibility level for a context
rpk registry compatibility-level get \
  --subject ":.staging:"

# Set the compatibility level for a context
rpk registry compatibility-level set \
  --subject ":.staging:" \
  --level BACKWARD

# Get the mode for a context
rpk registry mode get \
  --subject ":.staging:"

# Set the mode for a context
rpk registry mode set \
  --subject ":.staging:" \
  --mode READONLY

# Delete a subject within a context (soft delete)
rpk registry subject delete \
  --subject ":.staging:my-topic"

# List all subjects (returns qualified names for non-default contexts)
rpk registry subject list

# Grant read access to all subjects in a context (prefix ACL)
rpk security acl create \
  --registry-subject ":.staging:" \
  --resource-pattern-type prefixed \
  --operation read \
  --allow-principal User:alice
----

> For full reference documentation on these commands, see:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For additional detail, refer to the full reference documentation for these commands:
```

* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-schema-create.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-schema-list.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-schema-get.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-schema-check-compatibility.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-compatibility-level-get.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-compatibility-level-set.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-mode-get.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-mode-set.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-subject-delete.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-subject-list.adoc[]

== Client integration status

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The following table identifies the support level of Schema Registry context client integrations.
```

[#client-integration-status]

[cols="2,1,3", options="header"]
|===
| Client | Status | Notes

| Schema Registry API (all operations)

> | Full support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Supported
```

| Use qualified subjects directly in any endpoint.

| Java SerDe (Confluent)
| Supported
| Requires a custom `ContextNameStrategy`. See the Confluent SerDe documentation for details.

| Non-Java SerDe

> | Not yet supported (26.1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Not supported
```

> | Planned in a 26.1.x patch release. Workaround: set the client's Schema Registry base URL to `http://<host>:8081/contexts/{context}`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Workaround: set the client's Schema Registry base URL to `http://<host>:8081/contexts/{context}`.
```

| rpk
| In progress

> | Context management commands not yet available. Qualified subjects work in existing `rpk registry` commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| rpk
| Not supported
| Context management commands not available. Qualified subjects work in existing `rpk registry` commands.
```

| Redpanda Console
| In progress
| Not available in 26.1.

| Server-side schema ID validation
| Not supported

> | Out of scope for this release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Redpanda Console
| Not supported
| 

| Server-side schema ID validation
| Not supported
| 
```

|===

== ACL authorization

[#acl-authorization]

> Contexts use the existing `sr_subject` and `sr_registry` ACL resource types. No new resource types are needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Contexts use the existing `sr_subject` and `sr_registry` ACL resource types.
```

[cols="2,2,2", options="header"]
|===
| Operation | ACL resource | Permission required

| Context-level config/mode (`PUT /config/:<context>:`, `PUT /mode/:<context>:`)
| `sr_registry`
| `alter_configs`

| Read context-level config/mode
| `sr_registry`
| `describe_configs`

| List subjects / list contexts
| `sr_subject` (results filtered to accessible subjects)
| `describe`

| Delete a context (`DELETE /contexts/{context}`)
| `sr_registry`
| `delete`

| Schema CRUD on a subject
| `sr_subject` on the specific subject
| `read` / `write` / `delete`

| Subject-level config/mode
| `sr_subject` on the specific subject
| `alter_configs` / `describe_configs`
|===

=== Grant access to all subjects in a context

Use a prefix ACL on `sr_subject` with `--resource-pattern-type prefixed` to grant access to all current and future subjects within a context:

[source,bash]
----
rpk security acl create \
  --registry-subject ":.staging:" \
  --resource-pattern-type prefixed \
  --operation read \
  --allow-principal User:alice \
  --brokers <brokers>
----

=== Audit log format

> When Schema Registry ACLs are enabled, audit log entries include the fully qualified subject name for non-default context operations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you enable Schema Registry ACLs, audit log entries include the fully qualified subject name for non-default context operations:
```

[source,json]
----
{
  "resources": [
    {
      "name": ":.staging:my-topic",
      "type": "subject"
    }
  ]
}
----

> Default context subjects are logged with their unqualified name (no change from existing behavior).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Default context subjects are logged with their unqualified name.
```

== Metrics

> The following Schema Registry metrics have been updated to include a `context` label, enabling per-context monitoring:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following Schema Registry metrics include a `context` label, enabling per-context monitoring:
```

[cols="2,2", options="header"]
|===
| Metric | Change

| `*_schema_registry_cache_schema_count`
| New `context` label added.

| `*_schema_registry_cache_subject_count`
| New `context` label added.

| `*_schema_registry_cache_subject_version_count`
| New `context` label added.
|===

The count of non-default contexts is also included in Redpanda's phone-home telemetry.

For the full metrics reference, see xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc[].

ifndef::env-cloud[]
== Upgrade considerations

[#upgrade-considerations]
endif::env-cloud[]

[IMPORTANT]
====

> *Breaking change*: When `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` is enabled, any existing subject whose name matches the qualified subject pattern — for example, `:.staging:user-value` — is reinterpreted as subject `user-value` in context `.staging`, rather than as a literal subject name in the default context. Subjects without a `:.` prefix are unaffected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Breaking change*: When `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` is enabled, any existing subject whose name matches the qualified subject pattern (for example, `:.staging:user-value`) is reinterpreted as subject `user-value` in context `.staging`, rather than as a literal subject name in the default context. Subjects without a `:.` prefix are unaffected.
```

> This edge case is expected to be rare. No automatic migration is provided.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This edge case is rare. No automatic migration is provided.
```

====

> To audit your existing subjects for affected names before enabling the feature:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To audit your existing subjects for affected names before enabling Schema Registry contexts:
```

ifndef::env-cloud[]
[source,bash]
----
rpk registry subject list | grep '^\.'
----
endif::env-cloud[]

ifdef::env-cloud[]
[source,bash]
----
curl -s http://<schema-registry-host>:8081/subjects | jq '.[] | select(startswith(":."))'
----
endif::env-cloud[]

> If affected subjects are found, rename them before enabling the property, or plan to re-register them under the reinterpreted context structure after enabling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you find affected subjects, rename them before enabling the property, or plan to re-register them under the reinterpreted context structure after enabling.
```

[IMPORTANT]
====
Remember that changing `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` requires a broker restart in both directions (enabling and disabling).
====

== Troubleshooting

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Following is troubleshooting guidance for Schema Registry contexts.
```

[#schema-id-lookup-fails]
=== Schema ID lookup returns 404 or wrong schema

*Symptom*: `GET /schemas/ids/{id}` returns a 404 or returns the wrong schema after registering a schema in a non-default context.

*Cause*: `GET /schemas/ids/{id}` searches the *default context only*. A schema registered in `:.staging:my-topic` (returning ID `1`) is not found by `GET /schemas/ids/1` without a context hint.

*Resolution*: Pass the `subject` query parameter to scope the lookup to the correct context:

[source,bash]
----
curl -s "http://localhost:8081/schemas/ids/1?subject=:.staging:my-topic"
----

=== Qualified subjects not recognized (treated as literal names)

*Symptom*: Subjects with the `:.` prefix are stored as literal subject names in the default context instead of being parsed as context-qualified subjects.

> *Cause 1*: `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` is set to `false` (the 26.1 default for self-managed clusters).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Cause 1*: `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` is set to `false` (the default).
```

*Cause 2*: The property was set to `true` but the brokers have not yet been restarted. This property is not dynamic and requires a full broker restart to take effect.

*Resolution*:

ifndef::env-cloud[]
[source,bash]
----
rpk cluster config set schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects true
# Then restart all brokers
----
endif::env-cloud[]

> === Schema registration fails after upgrading to 26.1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Schema registration fails after upgrading to v26.1
```

// Self-managed-only content is wrapped in ifndef::env-cloud[] ... endif::[]

// tag::single-source[]

Schema Registry contexts are namespaces that isolate schemas, subjects, and configurations from one another within a single Schema Registry instance.
Each context maintains its own schema ID counter, mode settings, and compatibility settings.
Existing schemas will simply continue to work: unqualified subjects remain in the implicit default context

Schema Registry contexts are compatible with the Confluent Schema Registry Contexts API.

After reading this page, you will be able to:

* [ ] {learning-objective-1}
* [ ] {learning-objective-2}
* [ ] {learning-objective-3}

== When to use contexts

Contexts are most useful in the following scenarios:

* *Multi-team deployments on a shared cluster*: Teams can register schemas independently under their own contexts without risking naming collisions or configuration drift.
* *Schema migration from Confluent Schema Registry*: Confluent Schema Registry uses contexts to namespace schemas. If your existing workflows or tooling rely on contexts, Redpanda's compatible implementation lets you migrate without restructuring your schema layout.

> * *Multi-cluster schema syncing and disaster recovery*: Dedicated namespaces reduce schema ID collision risk when syncing schemas across clusters.

Reviewer 2: @mattschumpert @trevpanda what do you think about the framing of this last bullet point? While it's true that we contexts enable this, and this is one of the main motivators for using contexts, our redpanda tooling (shadow linking, and I believe RPCN as well) doesn't yet support syncing into specific contexts.

Reviewer 3: @pgellert but IIUC IT does support syncing in this way if all of the multiple source clusters were already each using contexts and fanning into a single DR cluster with Shadowing. So the story could be better, but I think it holds?

Reviewer 2: You're right in that what we do support is single redpanda cluster /w contexts -> single redpanda cluster /w contexts shadowing (since we're still just replicating the schemas topic as is).

>  IT does support syncing in this way if all of the multiple source clusters were already each using contexts and fanning into a single DR cluster with Shadowing

But I think what you're describing here is essentially hub-and-spoke/cluster fan-in with contexts which we don't yet have: https://redpanda.aha.io/features/E-211

I'm unsure if RPCN has a sync from cluster A context X -> cluster B context Y feature at this point. I vaguely recall that being on the table, but I'm not sure if that's implemented or not.

Reviewer 4: I think @pgellert is right about this concern. We don't have a mechanism for syncing topics across multiple clusters, let alone schema registries, so I think we should remove this bullet point.

ifdef::env-cloud[]
NOTE: On Serverless clusters, Redpanda uses contexts internally for per-tenant isolation. Contexts are not exposed to end users on Serverless. On BYOC and Dedicated clusters, contexts are available and user-configurable.
endif::env-cloud[]

== Prerequisites

Before using Schema Registry contexts, ensure that:

* You are running xref:get-started:release-notes/redpanda.adoc[Redpanda v26.1] or later.
* The xref:reference:properties/cluster-properties.adoc#schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects[`schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects`] cluster configuration property is set to `true`.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
The `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` property defaults to `false`, so you must explicitly enable it. After changing it, you must restart your brokers for the change to take effect. If qualified subjects are still being treated as literal names after enabling the flag, a broker restart is the most likely cause.
====
+
* If you use Schema Registry ACLs, ensure the principal interacting with a context has the appropriate permissions. See <<acl-authorization>>.

== Limitations

> * *Console and rpk*: Native support for context management operations (listing, creating, and deleting contexts) in the Redpanda Console UI and `rpk` CLI is not available. Use the Schema Registry HTTP API directly. See <<client-integration-status>>.

Reviewer 2: I believe by now both console and rpk support have been implemented in [ENG-961](https://redpandadata.atlassian.net/browse/ENG-961) by @c-julin.

Reviewer 4: PR that adds context subcommands to rpk https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/pull/29689

> * *Non-Java SerDe clients*: Non-Java serializer/deserializer clients do not natively support qualified subjects. Instead, point these clients at the `/contexts/{context}/...` base URL path prefix. See <<client-integration-status>>.

Reviewer 2: > point these clients at the `/contexts/{context}/...`

These API handlers are still work-in-progress tracked by this PR: https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/pull/30189 and this EPIC: https://redpandadata.atlassian.net/browse/ENG-1036

So I think perhaps we should call non-java serde clients unsupported for now and update this after ENG-1036 ship (it already has docs required on the epic).

> * *Non-Java SerDe clients*: Non-Java serializer/deserializer clients do not natively support qualified subjects. Instead, point these clients at the `/contexts/{context}/...` base URL path prefix. See <<client-integration-status>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Non-Java SerDe clients*: Not supported in Schema Registry contexts.
```

== How Schema Registry contexts work
When you enable contexts, Schema Registry changes how it assigns schema IDs, resolves configuration, and interprets subject names.

=== Schema ID isolation

Prior to v26.1, the Schema Registry maintained a single global ID counter. All schemas shared one ID space, and a given schema ID pointed to exactly one schema across the entire registry.

With Schema Registry contexts, each context has its own independent ID counter. This means schema ID `1` in `.staging` and schema ID `1` in `.production` are different schemas. As a result (and by default), `GET /schemas/ids/{id}` searches the _default context only_. To retrieve a schema by ID from a non-default context, you must pass the `subject` query parameter to scope the lookup:

[source,bash]
----
GET /schemas/ids/1?subject=:.staging:my-topic
----

See also <<schema-id-lookup-fails>>.

=== Configuration resolution order

Prior to v26.1, mode and compatibility settings resolved as:

----

> Subject → Global → Built-in defaults

Reviewer 2: I think this would be more representative:
```suggestion
Subject → (default) Context → Built-in defaults
```

The word "Global" in this diagram will conflate two things once readers reach the `.__GLOBAL` section below: the pre-v26.1 server-wide settings, and the new reserved `.__GLOBAL` context. the old "global" values live in the default context's context-layer under the new scheme, while `.__GLOBAL` is a net-new lowest-priority fallback.

----

For example, setting the `.staging` context to `IMPORT` mode means all subjects in `.staging` inherit `IMPORT` unless they have a subject-level override, even if the global mode is `READWRITE`.

Use `defaultToGlobal=true` on `GET /config` and `GET /mode` requests to see the effective value after full fallback resolution.

=== Qualified subject syntax

Wherever the Schema Registry API accepts a subject, you can supply a qualified subject instead of a bare subject name:

[cols="2,1,2", options="header"]
|===
| Input | Context | Subject

| `user-events-value`
| `.` (default)
| `user-events-value`

| `:.staging:user-events-value`
| `.staging`
| `user-events-value`

| `:.:user-events-value`
| `.` (default)
| `user-events-value`

| `:.staging:`
| `.staging`
| (empty — used for context-level config/mode operations)
|===

=== `GET /subjects` behavior change

After enabling the flag, `GET /subjects` (with no `subjectPrefix`) returns subjects across _all_ contexts. Non-default context subjects appear with their qualified names (for example, `:.staging:my-topic`). 
Note that this differs from the previous flat lists of bare subject names.

> === Cross-context schema references

Reviewer 2: There are two `Cross-context schema references` section at the moment. I think they could be merged into one, probably into the top one under "How Schema Registry contexts work"

Reviewer: argh--good catch

----

NOTE: A context is only listed after at least one schema has been registered in it. Pre-configuring mode or compatibility alone does not cause a context to appear in this list. The default context (`.`) is always included.

=== List subjects using subject prefix filtering

The `subjectPrefix` query parameter on `GET /subjects` lets you scope subject listings precisely. The following table shows supported patterns:

[cols="2,3", options="header"]
|===
| Prefix | Matches

| `my-`
| Subjects starting with `my-` in the default context only

| `:.staging:`
| All subjects in the `.staging` context

| `:.staging:my-`
| Subjects starting with `my-` in the `.staging` context

| `:*:`
| All subjects in all contexts

| `:*:my-`
| Subjects starting with `my-` across all contexts
|===

[source,bash]
----
# All subjects in the .staging context
curl -s "http://localhost:8081/subjects?subjectPrefix=:.staging:"

# All subjects across all contexts
curl -s "http://localhost:8081/subjects?subjectPrefix=:*:"
----

You can also list subjects within a context using the `/contexts/{context}/subjects` path:

[source,bash]
----
curl -s http://localhost:8081/contexts/.staging/subjects

> ----

Reviewer 2: This is still WIP, as per https://github.com/redpanda-data/docs/pull/1658/changes#r3123466186

  -d '{"compatibility": "BACKWARD"}'

# Get compatibility for a specific subject within a context
# Use defaultToGlobal=true to see the effective value after fallback
curl -s "http://localhost:8081/config/:.staging:my-topic?defaultToGlobal=true"
----

=== Set the global context fallback

The `.:.__GLOBAL:` context provides the lowest-priority fallback for all contexts and subjects that do not have their own explicit setting:

[source,bash]
----
# Get the current global mode
curl -s http://localhost:8081/mode/:.__GLOBAL:

# Set global default compatibility
curl -s -X PUT \
  http://localhost:8081/config/:.__GLOBAL: \
  -H "Content-Type: application/vnd.schemaregistry.v1+json" \
  -d '{"compatibility": "FULL"}'
----

NOTE: `.__GLOBAL` is a reserved context name and cannot be used as a regular context name.

=== Retrieve schema references with qualified names

Use `referenceFormat=qualified` on `GET /subjects/{subject}/versions/{version}` to return references with context-qualified subject names instead of bare names:

[source,bash]
----
curl -s "http://localhost:8081/subjects/:.staging:my-topic/versions/1?referenceFormat=qualified"
----

> This is useful when schemas span multiple contexts and you need to disambiguate reference targets.

Reviewer 2: I'd maybe throw in a [See Cross-context schema references](https://deploy-preview-1658--redpanda-docs-preview.netlify.app/current/manage/schema-reg/schema-reg-contexts/#cross-context-schema-references) here.

=== Use a context as the client base URL

> You can point a Schema Registry client at a specific context by setting the client's Schema Registry URL to `${host}/contexts/{context}`. Redpanda rewrites requests under this path prefix to operate within the specified context. This is the recommended workaround for non-Java SerDe clients that do not yet support qualified subject syntax natively:

Reviewer 2: This is still WIP, as per https://github.com/redpanda-data/docs/pull/1658/changes#r3123466186

Reviewer: Remove this entire task then, @pgellert ?

Reviewer 2: Let's see what Matt and Trevor think in https://github.com/redpanda-data/docs/pull/1658#discussion_r3125250516. We should do the same here.

[source,text]
----
# All requests to this base URL operate within the .staging context
http://localhost:8081/contexts/.staging
----

=== Pre-configure a context before registering schemas

You can set mode or compatibility on a context before any schemas are registered in it:

[source,bash]
----
curl -s -X PUT \
  http://localhost:8081/mode/:.new-team: \
  -H "Content-Type: application/vnd.schemaregistry.v1+json" \
  -d '{"mode": "READONLY"}'
----

Schema registrations in `:.new-team:` will be rejected until the mode is changed to `READWRITE`.

=== Cross-context schema references

Schemas can reference schemas in other contexts using qualified subject names in the `references` field:

[source,json]
----
{
  "schema": "...",
  "references": [
    {
      "name": "CommonType",
      "subject": ":.shared:CommonType",
      "version": 1
    }
  ]
}
----

> Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve to the same context as the root schema, not the default context.

Reviewer 2: This is a subtle point that I think could warrant another example. I'm thinking something like this:

```suggestion
Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve to the same context as the root schema, not the default context.

[source,json]
----
{
  "schema": "...",
  "references": [
    {
      "name": "CommonType",
      "subject": "CommonType", // assumes CommonType is a subject is in the same context as the root schema
      "version": 1
    }
  ]
}
----
```

=== Delete a context

> You can only delete a context when it contains no subjects. Soft-deleted subjects still count; however, you must hard-delete all subjects before removing the context. Attempting to delete a non-empty context returns a `context_not_empty` error.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can only delete a context when it contains no subjects. Soft-deleted subjects still count; so, you must hard-delete all subjects before removing the context. Attempting to delete a non-empty context returns a `context_not_empty` error.
```

* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-compatibility-level-set.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-mode-get.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-mode-set.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-subject-delete.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-subject-list.adoc[]

[#client-integration-status]
== Client integration status

The following table identifies the support level of Schema Registry context client integrations.

[cols="2,1,3", options="header"]
|===
| Client | Status | Notes

| Schema Registry API (all operations)
| Supported
| Use qualified subjects directly in any endpoint.

| Java SerDe (Confluent)
| Supported
| Requires a custom `ContextNameStrategy`. See the Confluent SerDe documentation for details.

| Non-Java SerDe
| Not supported
| Workaround: set the client's Schema Registry base URL to `http://<host>:8081/contexts/{context}`.

| rpk
| Not supported
| Context management commands not available. Qualified subjects work in existing `rpk registry` commands.

| Redpanda Console
| Not supported
|  N/A

| Server-side schema ID validation
| Not supported
|  N/A

> |===

Reviewer 2: "Server-side schema ID validation" is not really a client, but more an integration with contexts. Perhaps we should call this section just Integration status, or maybe there's a better term here that I can't think of.

| `alter_configs` / `describe_configs`
|===

=== Grant access to all subjects in a context

Use a prefix ACL on `sr_subject` with `--resource-pattern-type prefixed` to grant access to all current and future subjects within a context:

[source,bash]
----
rpk security acl create \
  --registry-subject ":.staging:" \
  --resource-pattern-type prefixed \
  --operation read \
  --allow-principal User:alice \
  --brokers <brokers>
----

=== Audit log format

When you enable Schema Registry ACLs, audit log entries include the fully qualified subject name for non-default context operations:

[source,json]
----
{
  "resources": [
    {
      "name": ":.staging:my-topic",
      "type": "subject"
    }
  ]
}
----

Default context subjects are logged with their unqualified name.

== Metrics

The following Schema Registry metrics include a `context` label, enabling per-context monitoring:

[cols="2,2", options="header"]
|===
| Metric | Change

| `*_schema_registry_cache_schema_count`
| New `context` label added.

| `*_schema_registry_cache_subject_count`
| New `context` label added.

| `*_schema_registry_cache_subject_version_count`
| New `context` label added.
|===

> The count of non-default contexts is also included in Redpanda's phone-home telemetry.

Reviewer 2: We tend not to document telemetry changes.
```suggestion
```

For the full metrics reference, see xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc[].

ifndef::env-cloud[]
== Upgrade considerations

[#upgrade-considerations]
endif::env-cloud[]

[IMPORTANT]
====
*Breaking change*: When `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` is enabled, any existing subject whose name matches the qualified subject pattern (for example, `:.staging:user-value`) is reinterpreted as subject `user-value` in context `.staging`, rather than as a literal subject name in the default context. Subjects without a `:.` prefix are unaffected.

This edge case is rare. No automatic migration is provided.
====

To audit your existing subjects for affected names before enabling Schema Registry contexts:

ifndef::env-cloud[]
[source,bash]
----
rpk registry subject list | grep '^\.'
----
endif::env-cloud[]

ifdef::env-cloud[]
[source,bash]
----
curl -s http://<schema-registry-host>:8081/subjects | jq '.[] | select(startswith(":."))'
----
endif::env-cloud[]

> If you find affected subjects, rename them before enabling the property, or plan to re-register them under the reinterpreted context structure after enabling.

Reviewer 2: Re-registering within the same cluster is not supported, so we should carefully phrase the second alternative:
```suggestion
If you find affected subjects, rename them before enabling the property, or create a new cluster with contexts enabled and import the schemas into the new cluster, where they will be interpreted as context-aware subjects.
```

=== Cross-context schema references

Contexts do not enforce isolation of schema references. Schemas can reference schemas in any other context. Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve within the same context as the root schema, not the default context. Qualified references can reach any context explicitly (for example, `:.shared:CommonType`).

== Enable Schema Registry contexts

ifndef::env-cloud[]
To enable contexts, set the `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` cluster configuration property to `true`:

[source,bash]
----
rpk cluster config set schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects true
----

[IMPORTANT]
====
This property requires a broker restart. The change does not take effect until all brokers have restarted.
====

To verify the current setting:

[source,bash]
----
rpk cluster config get schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects
----
endif::env-cloud[]

ifdef::env-cloud[]
NOTE: On BYOC and Dedicated clusters, contact Redpanda support or use the cluster configuration API to enable `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects`. This property requires a broker restart.
endif::env-cloud[]

== Configure Schema Registry contexts

> Following are the various configuration options available for Schema Registry contexts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following configuration examples show how to perform common context operations.
```

* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-mode-get.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-mode-set.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-subject-delete.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-subject-list.adoc[]

[#client-integration-status]
== Client integration status

The following table identifies the support level of Schema Registry context client integrations.

[cols="2,1,3", options="header"]
|===
| Client | Status | Notes

| Schema Registry API (all operations)
| Supported
| Use qualified subjects directly in any endpoint.

| Java SerDe (Confluent)
| Supported
| Requires a custom `ContextNameStrategy`. See the Confluent SerDe documentation for details.

| Non-Java SerDe
| Not supported
| Workaround: set the client's Schema Registry base URL to `http://<host>:8081/contexts/{context}`.

| rpk
| Not supported
| Context management commands not available. Qualified subjects work in existing `rpk registry` commands.

| Redpanda Console
| Not supported
|  N/A

| Server-side schema ID validation
| Not supported
|  N/A
|===

[#acl-authorization]
== ACL authorization

> [#acl-authorization]

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

* *`referencedby` endpoint*: `GET /subjects/{subject}/versions/{version}/referencedby` returns a list of bare schema IDs with no context information. When references span contexts, it is not possible to determine which context each returned ID belongs to.
* *Cross-context isolation*: Contexts provide organizational and ID-space isolation, but do not prevent cross-context schema references. There is no mechanism to block schemas in one context from referencing schemas in another context.
* *Default context cannot be deleted*: You cannot delete the default context (`.`).
* *Breaking change on upgrade*: After enabling `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects`, any existing subject whose name matches the qualified subject pattern (for example, `:.staging:user-value`) is reinterpreted as subject `user-value` in context `.staging` rather than as a literal subject name in the default context. See <<upgrade-considerations>>.

== How Schema Registry contexts work

=== Schema ID isolation

Before contexts, the Schema Registry maintained a single global ID counter. All schemas shared one ID space, and a given schema ID pointed to exactly one schema across the entire registry.

> After enabling contexts, *each context has its own independent ID counter*. This means schema ID `1` in `.staging` and schema ID `1` in `.production` are different schemas. As a result, `GET /schemas/ids/{id}` searches the *default context only* by default. To retrieve a schema by ID from a non-default context, you must pass the `subject` query parameter to scope the lookup:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After enabling contexts, each context has its own independent ID counter. This means schema ID `1` in `.staging` and schema ID `1` in `.production` are different schemas. As a result (and by default), `GET /schemas/ids/{id}` searches the _default context only_. To retrieve a schema by ID from a non-default context, you must pass the `subject` query parameter to scope the lookup:
```

=== List subjects using subject prefix filtering

The `subjectPrefix` query parameter on `GET /subjects` lets you scope subject listings precisely. The following table shows supported patterns:

[cols="2,3", options="header"]
|===
| Prefix | Matches

| `my-`
| Subjects starting with `my-` in the default context only

| `:.staging:`
| All subjects in the `.staging` context

| `:.staging:my-`
| Subjects starting with `my-` in the `.staging` context

| `:*:`
| All subjects in all contexts

| `:*:my-`
| Subjects starting with `my-` across all contexts
|===

[source,bash]
----
# All subjects in the .staging context
curl -s "http://localhost:8081/subjects?subjectPrefix=:.staging:"

# All subjects across all contexts
curl -s "http://localhost:8081/subjects?subjectPrefix=:*:"
----

You can also list subjects within a context using the `/contexts/{context}/subjects` path:

[source,bash]
----
curl -s http://localhost:8081/contexts/.staging/subjects
----

=== Set context-level mode

> Mode can be set at the context level by specifying a qualified subject with an empty subject name (`:<context>:`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can configure mode at the context level by specifying a qualified subject with an empty subject name (`:<context>:`):
```

=== Delete a context

A context can only be deleted when it contains no subjects. Soft-deleted subjects still count — you must hard-delete all subjects before the context can be removed. Attempting to delete a non-empty context returns a `context_not_empty` error.

[NOTE]
====
The default context (`.`) cannot be deleted.
====

[source,bash]
----
# Hard-delete all subjects in the context first
curl -s -X DELETE "http://localhost:8081/subjects/:.staging:my-topic?permanent=true"

# Then delete the empty context
curl -s -X DELETE http://localhost:8081/contexts/.staging
----

== Cluster configuration property

`schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects`::
+
[cols="1,3"]
|===
| Type | Boolean
| Default (v26.1) | `false`
| Restart required | Yes
|===
+
When `false`, subjects are treated as literal strings (existing behavior). When `true`, subjects matching the `:<context>:<subject>` pattern are parsed as context-qualified subjects.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
This is not a dynamic property. Broker restart is required after changing this value.
====
+
ifndef::env-cloud[]
[source,bash]
----
rpk cluster config set schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects true
----

> endif::env-cloud[]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

= Schema Registry Contexts
:description: Use Schema Registry contexts to create isolated namespaces for schemas, subjects, and configuration—enabling multi-tenant and multi-team deployments without separate Schema Registry instances.
:page-tags: [Schema Registry, contexts, multi-tenant, Confluent compatibility]
// Learning objectives:
// - Understand what Schema Registry contexts are and when to use them.
// - Understand the qualified subject syntax (:<context>:<subject>).
// - Enable the feature using the cluster configuration property (requires broker restart).
// - Configure contexts, including per-context mode and compatibility settings.
// - Apply ACLs to control access at the context level.
// - Identify updated metrics and the new cluster configuration property.
// - Resolve common issues related to upgrade, schema ID lookups, and subject naming.

// Single-sourcing tags: Cloud-only content is wrapped in ifdef::env-cloud[] ... endif::[]
// Self-managed-only content is wrapped in ifndef::env-cloud[] ... endif::[]

// tag::single-source[]

> Schema Registry contexts are namespaces that isolate schemas, subjects, and configuration from one another within a single Schema Registry instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Schema Registry contexts are namespaces that isolate schemas, subjects, and configurations from one another within a single Schema Registry instance.
```

Each context maintains its own schema ID counter, mode settings, and compatibility settings.
Unqualified subjects continue to work unchanged in the implicit default context.

> Schema Registry contexts is compatible with the Confluent Schema Registry Contexts API and requires no enterprise license.

Author: ```suggestion
Schema Registry contexts is compatible with the Confluent Schema Registry Contexts API.
```
Removing since we don't note things that don't require an enterprise license. Plus it's cleaner for single sourcing into Cloud

== When to use contexts

Contexts are most useful in the following scenarios:

* *Multi-team deployments on a shared cluster*: Teams can register schemas independently under their own contexts without risking naming collisions or configuration drift.
* *Schema migration from Confluent Schema Registry*: Confluent Schema Registry uses contexts to namespace schemas. If your existing workflows or tooling rely on contexts, Redpanda's compatible implementation lets you migrate without restructuring your schema layout.
* *Multi-cluster schema syncing and disaster recovery*: Dedicated namespaces reduce schema ID collision risk when syncing schemas across clusters.

ifdef::env-cloud[]
NOTE: On Serverless clusters, Redpanda uses contexts internally for per-tenant isolation. Contexts are not exposed to end users on Serverless. On BYOC and Dedicated clusters, contexts are available and user-configurable.
endif::env-cloud[]

== Prerequisites

Before using Schema Registry contexts, ensure that:

* You are running Redpanda v26.1 or later.

> * The `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` cluster configuration property is set to `true`.

Author: I think this (schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects) should be conditionalized out for Cloud and replaced with the Note about this property you have later in the file!

Reviewer: Which command @micheleRP ?

|===

=== `GET /subjects` behavior change

After enabling the flag, `GET /subjects` (with no `subjectPrefix`) returns subjects across _all_ contexts. Non-default context subjects appear with their qualified names (for example, `:.staging:my-topic`). 
Note that this differs from the previous flat lists of bare subject names.

=== Cross-context schema references

Contexts do not enforce isolation of schema references. Schemas can reference schemas in any other context. Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve within the same context as the root schema, not the default context. Qualified references can reach any context explicitly (for example, `:.shared:CommonType`).

Schemas can reference schemas in other contexts using qualified subject names in the `references` field:

[source,json]
----
{
  "schema": "...",
  "references": [
    {
      "name": "CommonType",
      "subject": ":.shared:CommonType",
      "version": 1
    }
  ]
}
----

Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve to the same context as the root schema, not the default context.

[source,json]
----
{
  "schema": "...",
  "references": [
    {
      "name": "CommonType",

>       "subject": "CommonType", // assumes CommonType is a subject is in the same context as the root schema

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      "subject": "CommonType", // Assumed that CommonType is a subject is in the same context as the root schema
```

[NOTE]
====
The default context (`.`) cannot be deleted.
====

[source,bash]
----
# Hard-delete all subjects in the context first
curl -s -X DELETE "http://localhost:8081/subjects/:.staging:my-topic?permanent=true"

# Then delete the empty context
curl -s -X DELETE http://localhost:8081/contexts/.staging
----

== Cluster configuration property

`schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects`::
+
[cols="1,3"]
|===
| Type | Boolean
| Default (26.1) | `false`
| Default (26.2) | `true`
| Removed in | 26.3 (always enabled)
| Restart required | Yes
|===
+
When `false`, subjects are treated as literal strings (existing behavior). When `true`, subjects matching the `:<context>:<subject>` pattern are parsed as context-qualified subjects.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
This is not a dynamic property. Broker restart is required after changing this value.
====
+
ifndef::env-cloud[]
[source,bash]
----
rpk cluster config set schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects true
----
endif::env-cloud[]

> == rpk commands

Author: this heading isn't rendering properly

Reviewer: <img width="1054" height="314" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/82b453ec-2d21-44b4-9b31-0f79c1b34172" />

Reviewer: ??

[source,bash]
----
rpk security acl create \
  --registry-subject ":.staging:" \
  --resource-pattern-type prefixed \
  --operation read \
  --allow-principal User:alice \
  --brokers <brokers>
----

=== Audit log format

When Schema Registry ACLs are enabled, audit log entries include the fully qualified subject name for non-default context operations:

[source,json]
----
{
  "resources": [
    {
      "name": ":.staging:my-topic",
      "type": "subject"
    }
  ]
}
----

Default context subjects are logged with their unqualified name (no change from existing behavior).

== Metrics

The following Schema Registry metrics have been updated to include a `context` label, enabling per-context monitoring:

[cols="2,2", options="header"]
|===
| Metric | Change

| `*_schema_registry_cache_schema_count`
| New `context` label added.

| `*_schema_registry_cache_subject_count`
| New `context` label added.

| `*_schema_registry_cache_subject_version_count`
| New `context` label added.
|===

The count of non-default contexts is also included in Redpanda's phone-home telemetry.

For the full metrics reference, see xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc[].

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

ifndef::env-cloud[]
```

> == Upgrade considerations

Author: I think this section should probably be conditionalized out for Cloud

> [#upgrade-considerations]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Upgrade considerations

[#upgrade-considerations]
endif::env-cloud[]
```

=== Qualified subject syntax

Wherever the Schema Registry API accepts a subject, you can supply a qualified subject instead of a bare subject name:

[cols="2,1,2", options="header"]
|===
| Input | Context | Subject

| `user-events-value`
| `.` (default)
| `user-events-value`

| `:.staging:user-events-value`
| `.staging`
| `user-events-value`

| `:.:user-events-value`
| `.` (default)
| `user-events-value`

| `:.staging:`
| `.staging`
| (empty — used for context-level config/mode operations)
|===

=== `GET /subjects` behavior change

After enabling the flag, `GET /subjects` (with no `subjectPrefix`) returns subjects across _all_ contexts. Non-default context subjects appear with their qualified names (for example, `:.staging:my-topic`). 
Note that this differs from the previous flat lists of bare subject names.

=== Cross-context schema references

Contexts do not enforce isolation of schema references. Schemas can reference schemas in any other context. Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve within the same context as the root schema, not the default context. Qualified references can reach any context explicitly (for example, `:.shared:CommonType`).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Schemas can reference schemas in other contexts using qualified subject names in the `references` field:

[source,json]
----
{
  "schema": "...",
  "references": [
    {
      "name": "CommonType",
      "subject": ":.shared:CommonType",
      "version": 1
    }
  ]
}
----

Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve to the same context as the root schema, not the default context.

[source,json]
----
{
  "schema": "...",
  "references": [
    {
      "name": "CommonType",
      "subject": "CommonType", // assumes CommonType is a subject is in the same context as the root schema
      "version": 1
    }
  ]
}
----

```

Schemas can reference schemas in other contexts using qualified subject names in the `references` field:

[source,json]
----
{
  "schema": "...",
  "references": [
    {
      "name": "CommonType",
      "subject": ":.shared:CommonType",
      "version": 1
    }
  ]
}
----

Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve to the same context as the root schema, not the default context.

[source,json]
----
{
  "schema": "...",
  "references": [
    {
      "name": "CommonType",

>       "subject": "CommonType", // Assumed that CommonType is a subject is in the same context as the root schema

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      "subject": "CommonType", // Assumed that CommonType is a subject in the same context as the root schema
```

----
# All requests to this base URL operate within the .staging context
http://localhost:8081/contexts/.staging
----

=== Pre-configure a context before registering schemas

You can set mode or compatibility on a context before any schemas are registered in it:

[source,bash]
----
curl -s -X PUT \
  http://localhost:8081/mode/:.new-team: \
  -H "Content-Type: application/vnd.schemaregistry.v1+json" \
  -d '{"mode": "READONLY"}'
----

Schema registrations in `:.new-team:` will be rejected until the mode is changed to `READWRITE`.

=== Cross-context schema references

Schemas can reference schemas in other contexts using qualified subject names in the `references` field:

[source,json]
----
{
  "schema": "...",
  "references": [
    {
      "name": "CommonType",
      "subject": ":.shared:CommonType",
      "version": 1
    }
  ]
}
----

Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve to the same context as the root schema, not the default context.

[source,json]
----
{
  "schema": "...",
  "references": [
    {
      "name": "CommonType",
      "subject": "CommonType", // assumes CommonType is a subject is in the same context as the root schema
      "version": 1
    }
  ]
}

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

  --subject ":.staging:my-topic"

# List all subjects (returns qualified names for non-default contexts)
rpk registry subject list

# Grant read access to all subjects in a context (prefix ACL)
rpk security acl create \
  --registry-subject ":.staging:" \
  --resource-pattern-type prefixed \
  --operation read \
  --allow-principal User:alice
----

For additional detail, refer to the full reference documentation for these commands:

* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-schema-create.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-schema-list.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-schema-get.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-schema-check-compatibility.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-compatibility-level-get.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-compatibility-level-set.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-mode-get.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-mode-set.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-subject-delete.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-subject-list.adoc[]

[#client-integration-status]
== Client integration status

> The following table identifies the support level of Schema Registry context client integrations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table identifies the status of Schema Registry context client integrations.
```

ifdef::env-cloud[]
NOTE: On Serverless clusters, Redpanda uses contexts internally for per-tenant isolation. Contexts are not exposed to end users on Serverless. On BYOC and Dedicated clusters, contexts are available and user-configurable.
endif::env-cloud[]

== Prerequisites

Before using Schema Registry contexts, ensure that:

* You are running xref:get-started:release-notes/redpanda.adoc[Redpanda v26.1] or later.
* The xref:reference:properties/cluster-properties.adoc#schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects[`schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects`] cluster configuration property is set to `true`.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
The `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` property defaults to `false`, so you must explicitly enable it. After changing it, you must restart your brokers for the change to take effect. If qualified subjects are still being treated as literal names after enabling the flag, a broker restart is the most likely cause.
====
+
* If you use Schema Registry ACLs, ensure the principal interacting with a context has the appropriate permissions. See <<acl-authorization>>.

== Limitations

> * *Console and rpk*: Native support for context management operations (listing, creating, and deleting contexts) in the Redpanda Console UI and `rpk` CLI is not available. Use the Schema Registry HTTP API directly. See <<client-integration-status>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

:page-tags: [Schema Registry, contexts, multi-tenant, Confluent compatibility]
// Learning objectives:
// - Understand what Schema Registry contexts are and when to use them.
// - Understand the qualified subject syntax (:<context>:<subject>).
// - Enable the feature using the cluster configuration property (requires broker restart).
// - Configure contexts, including per-context mode and compatibility settings.
// - Apply ACLs to control access at the context level.
// - Identify updated metrics and the new cluster configuration property.
// - Resolve common issues related to upgrade, schema ID lookups, and subject naming.

// Single-sourcing tags: Cloud-only content is wrapped in ifdef::env-cloud[] ... endif::[]
// Self-managed-only content is wrapped in ifndef::env-cloud[] ... endif::[]

Schema Registry contexts are namespaces that isolate schemas, subjects, and configuration from one another within a single Schema Registry instance.
Each context maintains its own schema ID counter, mode settings, and compatibility settings.

> Unqualified subjects continue to work unchanged in the implicit default context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Existing schemas will simply continue to work: unqualified subjects remain in the implicit default context
```

Schema Registry contexts is compatible with the Confluent Schema Registry Contexts API and requires no enterprise license.

== When to use contexts

Contexts are most useful in the following scenarios:

* *Multi-team deployments on a shared cluster*: Teams can register schemas independently under their own contexts without risking naming collisions or configuration drift.
* *Schema migration from Confluent Schema Registry*: Confluent Schema Registry uses contexts to namespace schemas. If your existing workflows or tooling rely on contexts, Redpanda's compatible implementation lets you migrate without restructuring your schema layout.
* *Multi-cluster schema syncing and disaster recovery*: Dedicated namespaces reduce schema ID collision risk when syncing schemas across clusters.

ifdef::env-cloud[]
NOTE: On Serverless clusters, Redpanda uses contexts internally for per-tenant isolation. Contexts are not exposed to end users on Serverless. On BYOC and Dedicated clusters, contexts are available and user-configurable.
endif::env-cloud[]

== Prerequisites

Before using Schema Registry contexts, ensure that:

> * You are running Redpanda *26.1 or later*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You are running Redpanda v26.1 or later.
```

* The `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` cluster configuration property is set to `true`.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====

> `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` is _not_ a dynamic property. After changing it, you must restart your brokers for the change to take effect. If qualified subjects are still being treated as literal names after enabling the flag, a broker restart is the most likely cause.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` property defaults to `false`, so you must explicitly enable it. After changing it, you must restart your brokers for the change to take effect. If qualified subjects are still being treated as literal names after enabling the flag, a broker restart is the most likely cause.
```

====
+
ifndef::env-cloud[]
[NOTE]
====
The `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` property defaults to `false`. You must explicitly enable it.
====
endif::env-cloud[]

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

= Schema Registry Contexts
:description: Use Schema Registry contexts to create isolated namespaces for schemas, subjects, and configuration, enabling multi-tenant and multi-team deployments without separate Schema Registry instances.
:page-tags: [Schema Registry, contexts, multi-tenant, Confluent compatibility]
:page-topic-type: how-to
:personas: app_developer, streaming_developer, platform_admin
:learning-objective-1: Identify when to use Schema Registry contexts for multi-team or multi-cluster deployments.
:learning-objective-2: Describe how qualified subject syntax maps subjects to contexts.

> :learning-objective-3: Enable and configure Schema Registry contexts using the cluster property and HTTP API.

Reviewer 5: If we want these attributes to also apply to the Cloud page, these should go inside the single-source tag. learning-objectives in particular won't display on the [Cloud page](https://deploy-preview-551--rp-cloud.netlify.app/redpanda-cloud/manage/schema-reg/schema-reg-contexts/) as-is

Reviewer: done

// - Apply ACLs to control access at the context level.
// - Identify updated metrics and the new cluster configuration property.
// - Resolve common issues related to upgrade, schema ID lookups, and subject naming.

// Single-sourcing tags: Cloud-only content is wrapped in ifdef::env-cloud[] ... endif::[]
// Self-managed-only content is wrapped in ifndef::env-cloud[] ... endif::[]

Schema Registry contexts are namespaces that isolate schemas, subjects, and configuration from one another within a single Schema Registry instance.
Each context maintains its own schema ID counter, mode settings, and compatibility settings.
Unqualified subjects continue to work unchanged in the implicit default context.

> This feature is compatible with the Confluent Schema Registry Contexts API and requires no enterprise license.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Schema Registry contexts is compatible with the Confluent Schema Registry Contexts API and requires no enterprise license.
```

== When to use contexts

Contexts are most useful in the following scenarios:

* *Multi-team deployments on a shared cluster*: Teams can register schemas independently under their own contexts without risking naming collisions or configuration drift.

> * *Schema migration from Confluent Schema Registry*: Confluent SR uses contexts to namespace schemas. If your existing workflows or tooling rely on contexts, Redpanda's compatible implementation lets you migrate without restructuring your schema layout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Schema migration from Confluent Schema Registry*: Confluent Schema Registry uses contexts to namespace schemas. If your existing workflows or tooling rely on contexts, Redpanda's compatible implementation lets you migrate without restructuring your schema layout.
```

* *Multi-cluster schema syncing and disaster recovery*: Dedicated namespaces reduce schema ID collision risk when syncing schemas across clusters.

ifdef::env-cloud[]
NOTE: On Serverless clusters, Redpanda uses contexts internally for per-tenant isolation. Contexts are not exposed to end users on Serverless. On BYOC and Dedicated clusters, contexts are available and user-configurable.
endif::env-cloud[]

== Prerequisites

Before using Schema Registry contexts, ensure that:

* You are running Redpanda *26.1 or later*.
* The `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` cluster configuration property is set to `true`.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====

> `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` is *not a dynamic property*. After changing it, you must restart your brokers for the change to take effect. If qualified subjects are still being treated as literal names after enabling the flag, a broker restart is the most likely missing step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` is _not_ a dynamic property. After changing it, you must restart your brokers for the change to take effect. If qualified subjects are still being treated as literal names after enabling the flag, a broker restart is the most likely cause.
```

====
+
ifndef::env-cloud[]
[NOTE]
====

> In 26.1, `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` defaults to `false`. You must explicitly enable it. In 26.2, the default changes to `true`. In 26.3, the property is removed and contexts are always enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` property defaults to `false`. You must explicitly enable it.
```

====
endif::env-cloud[]

* If you use Schema Registry ACLs, ensure the principal interacting with a context has the appropriate permissions. See <<acl-authorization>>.

== Limitations

> * *Console and rpk*: Native support for context management operations (listing, creating, and deleting contexts) in the Redpanda Console UI and `rpk` CLI is in progress and not available in 26.1. Use the Schema Registry HTTP API directly. See <<client-integration-status>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Console and rpk*: Native support for context management operations (listing, creating, and deleting contexts) in the Redpanda Console UI and `rpk` CLI is not available. Use the Schema Registry HTTP API directly. See <<client-integration-status>>.
```

> * *Non-Java SerDe clients*: Non-Java serializer/deserializer clients do not yet natively support qualified subjects in 26.1. A fast-follow patch release in 26.1.x is planned. As a workaround, point these clients at the `/contexts/{context}/...` base URL path prefix. See <<client-integration-status>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Non-Java SerDe clients*: Non-Java serializer/deserializer clients do not natively support qualified subjects. Instead, point these clients at the `/contexts/{context}/...` base URL path prefix. See <<client-integration-status>>.
```

> * *Server-side schema ID validation*: Schema ID validation using Kafka record headers does not support contexts and is out of scope for the current release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Server-side schema ID validation*: Schema ID validation using Kafka record headers does not support contexts.
```

== Prerequisites

Before using Schema Registry contexts, ensure that:

* You are running xref:get-started:release-notes/redpanda.adoc[Redpanda v26.1] or later.
* The xref:reference:properties/cluster-properties.adoc#schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects[`schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects`] cluster configuration property is set to `true`.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
The `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` property defaults to `false`, so you must explicitly enable it. After changing it, you must restart your brokers for the change to take effect. If qualified subjects are still being treated as literal names after enabling the flag, a broker restart is most likely still needed.
====
+
* If you use Schema Registry ACLs, ensure the principal interacting with a context has the appropriate permissions. See <<acl-authorization>>.

== Limitations

* *Non-Java SerDe clients*: Not supported in Schema Registry contexts.

> * *Server-side schema ID validation*: Schema ID validation using Kafka record headers does not support contexts.

Reviewer 3: I'm afraid someone might misinterpret this, so we should probably clarify " Schema ID validation using magic byte & prefix is supported."

> * *Server-side schema ID validation*: Schema ID validation using Kafka record headers does not support contexts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Server-side schema ID validation*: Schema ID validation using Kafka record headers does not support contexts. However, schema ID validation using magic byte and prefix are supported.
```

> * *Iceberg topics*: Context-aware schema IDs are not yet surfaced in Iceberg topic integration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Iceberg topics*: Context-aware schema IDs are not surfaced in Iceberg topic integration.
```

> * *Iceberg topics*: Context-aware schema IDs are not surfaced in Iceberg topic integration.

Reviewer 3: Reword:   "Schemas within a context cannot currently be used for Iceberg Topics"

right @wdberkeley ?

(we are fixing this very soon by the way)

> * *Iceberg topics*: Context-aware schema IDs are not surfaced in Iceberg topic integration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Iceberg topics*: You cannot use schemas within a context for Iceberg Topics.
```

> * *Default context cannot be deleted*: The default context (`.`) cannot be deleted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Default context cannot be deleted*: You cannot delete the default context (`.`).
```

> endif::env-cloud[]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

[source,bash]
----
GET /schemas/ids/1?subject=:.staging:my-topic
----

See also <<schema-id-lookup-fails>>.

=== Configuration resolution order

Prior to v26.1, mode and compatibility settings resolved as:

----
Subject → (default) Context → Built-in defaults
----

After enabling contexts, a context layer sits between subject and global:

----
Subject → Context → Global (.:.__GLOBAL:) → Built-in defaults
----

For example, setting the `.staging` context to `IMPORT` mode means all subjects in `.staging` inherit `IMPORT` unless they have a subject-level override, even if the global mode is `READWRITE`.

Use `defaultToGlobal=true` on `GET /config` and `GET /mode` requests to see the effective value after full fallback resolution.

=== Qualified subject syntax

Wherever the Schema Registry API accepts a subject, you can supply a qualified subject instead of a bare subject name:

[cols="2,1,2", options="header"]
|===
| Input | Context | Subject

| `user-events-value`
| `.` (default)
| `user-events-value`

| `:.staging:user-events-value`
| `.staging`
| `user-events-value`

| `:.:user-events-value`
| `.` (default)
| `user-events-value`

| `:.staging:`
| `.staging`

> | (empty — used for context-level config/mode operations)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| empty (used for context-level config/mode operations)
```

|===

=== `GET /subjects` behavior change

After enabling the flag, `GET /subjects` (with no `subjectPrefix`) returns subjects across _all_ contexts. Non-default context subjects appear with their qualified names (for example, `:.staging:my-topic`). 
Note that this differs from the previous flat lists of bare subject names.

[#cross-context-schema-references]
=== Cross-context schema references

Contexts do not enforce isolation of schema references. Schemas can reference schemas in any other context. Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve within the same context as the root schema, not the default context. Qualified references can reach any context explicitly (for example, `:.shared:CommonType`).

> NOTE: The _root schema_ is the schema/subject that has the reference. For example, if you register version 1 of subject `:.prod:X` with a reference to `CommonSubject` version 1, then the root schema (to be more precise, the root _subject_) is `:.prox:X`. So in this case, this unqualified reference will resolve to `:.prod:CommonSubject`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
NOTE: The _root schema_ is the schema/subject that has the reference. For example, if you register version 1 of subject `:.prod:X` with a reference to `CommonSubject` version 1, then the root schema (to be more precise, the root _subject_) is `:.prod:X`. So in this case, this unqualified reference will resolve to `:.prod:CommonSubject`.
```
Typo?

    }
  ]
}
----

Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve to the same context as the root schema, not the default context.

[source,json]
----
{
  "schema": "...",
  "references": [
    {
      "name": "CommonType",
      "subject": "CommonType", // Assumed that CommonType is a subject in the same context as the root schema
      "version": 1
    }
  ]
}
----

== Enable Schema Registry contexts

ifndef::env-cloud[]
To enable contexts, set the `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` cluster configuration property to `true`:

[source,bash]
----
rpk cluster config set schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects true
----

[IMPORTANT]
====
This property requires a broker restart. The change does not take effect until all brokers have restarted.
====

To verify the current setting:

[source,bash]
----
rpk cluster config get schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects
----
endif::env-cloud[]

ifdef::env-cloud[]
NOTE: On BYOC and Dedicated clusters, contact Redpanda support or use the cluster configuration API to enable `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects`. This property requires a broker restart.
endif::env-cloud[]

== Configure Schema Registry contexts

> The following configuration examples show how to perform common context operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following configuration examples show how to perform common context operations using the Schema Registry HTTP API and qualified subject syntax.
```

=== Register a schema in a context

The following configuration examples show how to perform common context operations using the Schema Registry HTTP API and qualified subject syntax.

> To register a schema in a named context, use the qualified subject form in the `POST /subjects/{subject}/versions` request:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To register a schema in a named context, use the qualified subject form in the `POST /subjects/{subject}/versions` request:
```

=== Cross-context schema references

Schemas can reference schemas in other contexts using qualified subject names in the `references` field:

[source,json]
----
{
  "schema": "...",
  "references": [
    {
      "name": "CommonType",
      "subject": ":.shared:CommonType",
      "version": 1
    }
  ]
}
----

Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve to the same context as the root schema, not the default context.

=== Delete a context

A context can only be deleted when it contains no subjects. Soft-deleted subjects still count — you must hard-delete all subjects before the context can be removed. Attempting to delete a non-empty context returns a `context_not_empty` error.

[NOTE]
====
The default context (`.`) cannot be deleted.
====

[source,bash]
----
# Hard-delete all subjects in the context first
curl -s -X DELETE "http://localhost:8081/subjects/:.staging:my-topic?permanent=true"

# Then delete the empty context
curl -s -X DELETE http://localhost:8081/contexts/.staging
----

== Cluster configuration property

`schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects`::
+
[cols="1,3"]
|===
| Type | Boolean
| Default (26.1) | `false`
| Default (26.2) | `true`

> | Removed in | 26.3 (always enabled)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Default (v26.1) | `false`
```

====
The default context (`.`) cannot be deleted.
====

[source,bash]
----
# Hard-delete all subjects in the context first
curl -s -X DELETE "http://localhost:8081/subjects/:.staging:my-topic?permanent=true"

# Then delete the empty context
curl -s -X DELETE http://localhost:8081/contexts/.staging
----

== Configure Schema Registry contexts using rpk

[NOTE]
====
Native `rpk` commands for context management operations (listing, creating, and deleting contexts) are not available. Use the Schema Registry HTTP API for context-level operations. See <<client-integration-status>>.
====

Existing `rpk registry` commands that accept a subject name support qualified subject syntax once `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` is enabled. Pass a qualified subject wherever a `--subject` flag is accepted:

> [source,bash]

Reviewer 6: in rpk we also have the  `--schema-context` flag. and added support for list and delete context in rpk https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/pull/29689

* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-schema-create.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-schema-list.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-schema-get.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-schema-check-compatibility.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-compatibility-level-get.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-compatibility-level-set.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-mode-get.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-mode-set.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-subject-delete.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-subject-list.adoc[]

[#client-integration-status]
== Client integration status

The following table identifies the status of Schema Registry context client integrations.

[cols="2,1,3", options="header"]
|===
| Client | Status | Notes

| Schema Registry API (all operations)
| Supported
| Use qualified subjects directly in any endpoint.

| Java SerDe (Confluent)
| Supported
| Requires a custom `ContextNameStrategy`. See the Confluent SerDe documentation for details.

| Non-Java SerDe
| Not supported

> | Workaround: set the client's Schema Registry base URL to `http://<host>:8081/contexts/{context}`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| Workaround: set the client's Schema Registry base URL to `\http://<host>:8081/contexts/{context}`.
```
Right now this URL displays as a clickable link which ideally we don't want readers to click

| rpk
| Not supported
| Context management commands not available. Qualified subjects work in existing `rpk registry` commands.

> | Redpanda Console

Reviewer 3: Not sure this is correct. @yougotashovel  told me we have done this (creating schemas within a context in console works)  cc @c-julin  @trevpanda

Reviewer 6: This is supported  and same goes for rpk context support is there

| Not supported
|  N/A

> | Server-side schema ID validation

Reviewer 3: Really ,or only not when IDs are  in the headers  @pgellert ?  Not supporting this at all would be a significant gap

Reviewer 2: Exactly like Confluent, we only support schema id validation in the default context: https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/schema-registry/schema-validation.html#limitations

For schema id validation outside of the default context, we'd need to get the GUID-in-header project done, as the schema GUID's are needed to uniquely identify the schema outside of the default context.

[source,bash]
----
rpk security acl create \
  --registry-subject ":.staging:" \
  --resource-pattern-type prefixed \
  --operation read \
  --allow-principal User:alice \
  --brokers <brokers>
----

=== Audit log format

When you enable Schema Registry ACLs, audit log entries include the fully qualified subject name for non-default context operations:

[source,json]
----
{
  "resources": [
    {
      "name": ":.staging:my-topic",
      "type": "subject"
    }
  ]
}
----

Default context subjects are logged with their unqualified name.

== Metrics

The following Schema Registry metrics include a `context` label, enabling per-context monitoring:

[cols="2,2", options="header"]
|===
| Metric | Change

| `*_schema_registry_cache_schema_count`
| New `context` label added.

| `*_schema_registry_cache_subject_count`
| New `context` label added.

| `*_schema_registry_cache_subject_version_count`
| New `context` label added.
|===

For the full metrics reference, see xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc[].

[#upgrade-considerations]
ifndef::env-cloud[]
== Upgrade considerations
endif::env-cloud[]

> [IMPORTANT]

Reviewer 5: Did we mean to conditionalize out the "Upgrade considerations" header only, but still have the content below appear in the Cloud page? Right now it appears as part of the [Metrics section](https://deploy-preview-551--rp-cloud.netlify.app/redpanda-cloud/manage/schema-reg/schema-reg-contexts/#metrics) - it feels a little out of place - just want to check if this is intentional

Reviewer: @pgellert Does the Upgrade considerations content also apply to Cloud? Isn't that managed by Cloud, and therefore, should not appear?

Reviewer 2: Good spot @kbatuigas! Yes, these apply to RP cloud as well.

None of the cloud clusters at the moment have this pattern that we're warning about, but we also don't "manage" their schemas for them, so I think we should consistently show this upgrade notice regardless of cloud vs self-hosted.

[IMPORTANT]
====
*Breaking change*: When `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` is enabled, any existing subject whose name matches the qualified subject pattern — for example, `:.staging:user-value` — is reinterpreted as subject `user-value` in context `.staging`, rather than as a literal subject name in the default context. Subjects without a `:.` prefix are unaffected.

This edge case is expected to be rare. No automatic migration is provided.
====

To audit your existing subjects for affected names before enabling the feature:

ifndef::env-cloud[]
[source,bash]
----
rpk registry subject list | grep '^\.'
----
endif::env-cloud[]

ifdef::env-cloud[]
[source,bash]
----
curl -s http://<schema-registry-host>:8081/subjects | jq '.[] | select(startswith(":."))'
----
endif::env-cloud[]

If affected subjects are found, rename them before enabling the property, or plan to re-register them under the reinterpreted context structure after enabling.

> In 26.2, if you need additional time to migrate, you can temporarily set `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` to `false` to restore literal behavior while you complete the migration. This option is removed in 26.3, after which contexts are always enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

*Resolution*: Register at least one schema in the context to materialize it, or verify that at least one subject exists under the context.

=== Cross-context reference resolution fails

*Symptom*: A schema registration that includes references to subjects in another context fails with a subject-not-found error.

*Cause*: Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve within the same context as the root schema, not in the default context.

*Resolution*: Use fully qualified references in the schema definition:

[source,json]
----
{
  "references": [
    {
      "name": "CommonType",
      "subject": ":.shared:CommonType",
      "version": 1
    }
  ]
}
----

=== `referencedby` returns IDs with no context information

*Symptom*: `GET /subjects/{subject}/versions/{version}/referencedby` returns schema IDs, but you cannot determine which context each ID belongs to.

*Cause*: This is a known limitation of the `referencedby` endpoint. It returns bare schema IDs with no context metadata. When references span contexts, the returned IDs are ambiguous.

> *Resolution*: There is no workaround in 26.1. To identify which schema an ID belongs to, try resolving the ID against each relevant context using `GET /schemas/ids/{id}?subject=:<context>:<subject>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Resolution*: There is no workaround. To identify which schema an ID belongs to, try resolving the ID against each relevant context using `GET /schemas/ids/{id}?subject=:<context>:<subject>`.
```

// Self-managed-only content is wrapped in ifndef::env-cloud[] ... endif::[]

// tag::single-source[]

Schema Registry contexts are namespaces that isolate schemas, subjects, and configurations from one another within a single Schema Registry instance.
Each context maintains its own schema ID counter, mode settings, and compatibility settings.
Existing schemas will simply continue to work: unqualified subjects remain in the implicit default context

Schema Registry contexts are compatible with the Confluent Schema Registry Contexts API.

After reading this page, you will be able to:

* [ ] {learning-objective-1}
* [ ] {learning-objective-2}
* [ ] {learning-objective-3}

== When to use contexts

Contexts are most useful in the following scenarios:

* *Multi-team deployments on a shared cluster*: Teams can register schemas independently under their own contexts without risking naming collisions or configuration drift.
* *Schema migration from Confluent Schema Registry*: Confluent Schema Registry uses contexts to namespace schemas. If your existing workflows or tooling rely on contexts, Redpanda's compatible implementation lets you migrate without restructuring your schema layout.

> * *Multi-cluster schema syncing and disaster recovery*: Dedicated namespaces reduce schema ID collision risk when syncing schemas across clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

ifdef::env-cloud[]
NOTE: On Serverless clusters, Redpanda uses contexts internally for per-tenant isolation. Contexts are not exposed to end users on Serverless. On BYOC and Dedicated clusters, contexts are available and user-configurable.
endif::env-cloud[]

> == Key concepts

Reviewer 4: I love this section

[cols="1,2",options="header"]
|===
| Term | Definition

| Context
| A namespace that isolates schemas, subjects, and configuration. Context names start with a dot, for example `.staging`, `.production`, or `.shared`.

| Default context
| The implicit context (`.`) for unqualified subjects. All existing, unqualified subjects live here.

| Global context
| `.__GLOBAL` is the lowest-priority fallback for mode and compatibility settings.

| Qualified subject
| A subject name in the format `:<context>:<subject>`, for example `:.staging:user-events-value`.

| Cross-context references
| Schemas can reference schemas in any other context. Contexts are not isolation boundaries and do not prevent cross-context dependencies. Unqualified references resolve within the parent schema's context.
|===

== Prerequisites

Before using Schema Registry contexts, ensure that:

* You are running xref:get-started:release-notes/redpanda.adoc[Redpanda v26.1] or later.
* The xref:reference:properties/cluster-properties.adoc#schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects[`schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects`] cluster configuration property is set to `true`.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====

> The `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` property defaults to `false`, so you must explicitly enable it. After changing it, you must restart your brokers for the change to take effect. If qualified subjects are still being treated as literal names after enabling the flag, a broker restart is the most likely cause.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `schema_registry_enable_qualified_subjects` property defaults to `false`, so you must explicitly enable it. After changing it, you must restart your brokers for the change to take effect. If qualified subjects are still being treated as literal names after enabling the flag, a broker restart is most likely still needed.
```

Use `defaultToGlobal=true` on `GET /config` and `GET /mode` requests to see the effective value after full fallback resolution.

=== Qualified subject syntax

Wherever the Schema Registry API accepts a subject, you can supply a qualified subject instead of a bare subject name:

[cols="2,1,2", options="header"]
|===
| Input | Context | Subject

| `user-events-value`
| `.` (default)
| `user-events-value`

| `:.staging:user-events-value`
| `.staging`
| `user-events-value`

| `:.:user-events-value`
| `.` (default)
| `user-events-value`

| `:.staging:`
| `.staging`
| (empty — used for context-level config/mode operations)
|===

=== `GET /subjects` behavior change

After enabling the flag, `GET /subjects` (with no `subjectPrefix`) returns subjects across _all_ contexts. Non-default context subjects appear with their qualified names (for example, `:.staging:my-topic`). 
Note that this differs from the previous flat lists of bare subject names.

[#cross-context-schema-references]
=== Cross-context schema references

> Contexts do not enforce isolation of schema references. Schemas can reference schemas in any other context. Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve within the same context as the root schema, not the default context. Qualified references can reach any context explicitly (for example, `:.shared:CommonType`).

Reviewer 4: I'm not clear what root schema is, if not default context. Could you explain what is meant by root schema or in the example describe how a resolution to the root schema would differ from the default context?

Reviewer 2: Root schema is the schema/subject that has this reference. For example, if I register version 1 of subject `:.prod:X` with a reference to `CommonSubject` version 1, then the root schema (or to be more precise the root subject) is `:.prox:X`, so in this case, this unqualified reference will resolve to `:.prod:CommonSubject`.

> Contexts do not enforce isolation of schema references. Schemas can reference schemas in any other context. Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve within the same context as the root schema, not the default context. Qualified references can reach any context explicitly (for example, `:.shared:CommonType`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Contexts do not enforce isolation of schema references. Schemas can reference schemas in any other context. Unqualified references in schema definitions resolve within the same context as the root schema, not the default context. Qualified references can reach any context explicitly (for example, `:.shared:CommonType`).

NOTE: The _root schema_ is the schema/subject that has the reference. For example, if you register version 1 of subject `:.prod:X` with a reference to `CommonSubject` version 1, then the root schema (to be more precise, the root _subject_) is `:.prox:X`. So in this case, this unqualified reference will resolve to `:.prod:CommonSubject`.
```

----

NOTE: A context is only listed after at least one schema has been registered in it. Pre-configuring mode or compatibility alone does not cause a context to appear in this list. The default context (`.`) is always included.

=== List subjects using subject prefix filtering

The `subjectPrefix` query parameter on `GET /subjects` lets you scope subject listings precisely. The following table shows supported patterns:

[cols="2,3", options="header"]
|===
| Prefix | Matches

| `my-`
| Subjects starting with `my-` in the default context only

| `:.staging:`
| All subjects in the `.staging` context

| `:.staging:my-`
| Subjects starting with `my-` in the `.staging` context

| `:*:`
| All subjects in all contexts

| `:*:my-`
| Subjects starting with `my-` across all contexts
|===

[source,bash]
----
# All subjects in the .staging context
curl -s "http://localhost:8081/subjects?subjectPrefix=:.staging:"

# All subjects across all contexts
curl -s "http://localhost:8081/subjects?subjectPrefix=:*:"
----

You can also list subjects within a context using the `/contexts/{context}/subjects` path:

[source,bash]
----
curl -s http://localhost:8081/contexts/.staging/subjects

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

  -H "Content-Type: application/vnd.schemaregistry.v1+json" \
  -d '{"compatibility": "FULL"}'
----

NOTE: `.__GLOBAL` is a reserved context name and cannot be used as a regular context name.

=== Retrieve schema references with qualified names

Use `referenceFormat=qualified` on `GET /subjects/{subject}/versions/{version}` to return references with context-qualified subject names instead of bare names:

[source,bash]
----
curl -s "http://localhost:8081/subjects/:.staging:my-topic/versions/1?referenceFormat=qualified"
----

This is useful when schemas span multiple contexts and you need to disambiguate reference targets. See <<cross-context-schema-references>>.

=== Use a context as the client base URL

You can point a Schema Registry client at a specific context by setting the client's Schema Registry URL to `${host}/contexts/{context}`. Redpanda rewrites requests under this path prefix to operate within the specified context. This is the recommended workaround for non-Java SerDe clients that do not yet support qualified subject syntax natively:

[source,text]
----
# All requests to this base URL operate within the .staging context
http://localhost:8081/contexts/.staging

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

After reading this page, you will be able to:

* [ ] {learning-objective-1}
* [ ] {learning-objective-2}
* [ ] {learning-objective-3}

== When to use contexts

Contexts are most useful in the following scenarios:

* *Multi-team deployments on a shared cluster*: Teams can register schemas independently under their own contexts without risking naming collisions or configuration drift.
* *Schema migration from Confluent Schema Registry*: Confluent Schema Registry uses contexts to namespace schemas. If your existing workflows or tooling rely on contexts, Redpanda's compatible implementation lets you migrate without restructuring your schema layout.
* *Multi-cluster schema syncing and disaster recovery*: Dedicated namespaces reduce schema ID collision risk when syncing schemas across clusters.

ifdef::env-cloud[]
NOTE: On Serverless clusters, Redpanda uses contexts internally for per-tenant isolation. Contexts are not exposed to end users on Serverless. On BYOC and Dedicated clusters, contexts are available and user-configurable.
endif::env-cloud[]

== Key concepts

[cols="1,2",options="header"]
|===
| Term | Definition

| Context

> | A namespace that isolates schemas, subjects, and configuration. Context names start with a dot, for example `.staging`, `.production`, or `.shared`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| A namespace that isolates schemas, subjects, and configuration. Context names start with a dot. For example: `.staging`, `.production`, or `.shared`.
```

| Default context
| The implicit context (`.`) for unqualified subjects. All existing, unqualified subjects live here.

| Global context
| `.__GLOBAL` is the lowest-priority fallback for mode and compatibility settings.

| Qualified subject

> | A subject name in the format `:<context>:<subject>`, for example `:.staging:user-events-value`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| A subject name in the format `:<context>:<subject>`. For example: `:.staging:user-events-value`.
```

rpk registry --schema-context .staging schema create \
  my-topic-value --schema my-schema.avsc

# List all schemas in the .staging context
rpk registry --schema-context .staging schema list

# Get a specific schema version from the .staging context
rpk registry --schema-context .staging schema get \
  my-topic-value --schema-version 1

# Check schema compatibility in the .staging context
rpk registry --schema-context .staging schema check-compatibility \
  my-topic-value --schema my-schema-v2.avsc

# Get the compatibility level for the .staging context
rpk registry --schema-context .staging compatibility-level get

# Set the compatibility level for the .staging context
rpk registry --schema-context .staging compatibility-level set --level BACKWARD

# Get the mode for the .staging context
rpk registry --schema-context .staging mode get

# Set the mode for the .staging context
rpk registry --schema-context .staging mode set --mode READONLY

# Delete a subject within the .staging context (soft delete)
rpk registry --schema-context .staging subject delete my-topic-value

# List all subjects scoped to the .staging context
rpk registry --schema-context .staging subject list
----

> Use `--skip-context-check` to bypass the admin API verification of context support (useful when admin API access is unavailable).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use `--skip-context-check` to bypass the admin API verification of context support (useful when Admin API access is unavailable).
```

* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-compatibility-level-set.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-mode-get.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-mode-set.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-subject-delete.adoc[]
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-registry/rpk-registry-subject-list.adoc[]

[#client-integration-status]
== Client integration status

The following table identifies the status of Schema Registry context client integrations.

[cols="2,1,3", options="header"]
|===
| Client | Status | Notes

| Schema Registry API (all operations)
| Supported
| Use qualified subjects directly in any endpoint.

| Java SerDe (Confluent)
| Supported
| Requires a custom `ContextNameStrategy`. See the Confluent SerDe documentation for details.

| Non-Java SerDe
| Not supported
| Workaround: set the client's Schema Registry base URL to `\http://<host>:8081/contexts/{context}`.

| rpk
| Supported
| Use `--schema-context` on any `rpk registry` command to scope operations to a context, or pass qualified subjects directly. Use `rpk registry context list` and `rpk registry context delete` to manage contexts.

| Redpanda Console

> | Not supported

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Supported
```

|  N/A

| Server-side schema ID validation

> | Not supported

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Supported (supports schema ID validation in the default context)
```

[source,bash]
----
rpk security acl create \
  --registry-subject ":.staging:" \
  --resource-pattern-type prefixed \
  --operation read \
  --allow-principal User:alice \
  --brokers <brokers>
----

=== Audit log format

When you enable Schema Registry ACLs, audit log entries include the fully qualified subject name for non-default context operations:

[source,json]
----
{
  "resources": [
    {
      "name": ":.staging:my-topic",
      "type": "subject"
    }
  ]
}
----

Default context subjects are logged with their unqualified name.

== Metrics

The following Schema Registry metrics include a `context` label, enabling per-context monitoring:

[cols="2,2", options="header"]
|===
| Metric | Change

| `*_schema_registry_cache_schema_count`
| New `context` label added.

| `*_schema_registry_cache_subject_count`
| New `context` label added.

| `*_schema_registry_cache_subject_version_count`
| New `context` label added.
|===

For the full metrics reference, see xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc[].

[#upgrade-considerations]
ifndef::env-cloud[]
== Upgrade considerations

> endif::env-cloud[]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[#upgrade-considerations]

== Upgrade considerations

```
